<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Religions of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia</title>
      <author><name reg="Sayce, Archibald Henry">Archibald Henry Sayce</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 12, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">35856</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-04-12">April 12, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Religions of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Ancient Egypt and Babylonia</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Gifford Lectures on the Ancient Egyptian and Babylonian Conception of the Divine</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Delivered in Aberdeen</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Archibald Henry Sayce, D.D., LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Professor of Assyriology, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Edinburgh</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">T. &amp; T. Clark, 38 George Street</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1903</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The subject of the following Lectures was <q>The Conception
of the Divine among the ancient Egyptians and
Babylonians,</q> and in writing them I have kept this
aspect of them constantly in view. The time has not
yet come for a systematic history of Babylonian religion,
whatever may be the case as regards ancient Egypt, and,
for reasons stated in the text, we must be content with
general principles and fragmentary details.
</p>

<p>
It is on this account that so little advance has been
made in grasping the real nature and characteristics of
Babylonian religion, and that a sort of natural history
description of it has been supposed to be all that is
needed by the student of religion. While reading over
again my Hibbert Lectures, as well as later works on the
subject, I have been gratified at finding how largely they
have borrowed from me, even though it be without
acknowledgment. But my Hibbert Lectures were necessarily
a pioneering work, and we must now attempt
to build on the materials which were there brought
together. In the present volume, therefore, the materials
are presupposed; they will be found for the most part
either in my Hibbert Lectures or in the cuneiform texts
which have since been published.
</p>

<p>
We are better off, fortunately, as regards the religion
of ancient Egypt. Thanks more especially to
Professor Maspero's unrivalled combination of learning
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
and genius, we are beginning to learn what the old
Egyptian faith actually was, and what were the foundations
on which it rested. The development of its dogmas
can be traced, at all events to a certain extent, and we
can even watch the progress of their decay.
</p>

<p>
There are two facts which, I am bound to add, have
been forced upon me by a study of the old religions of
civilised humanity. On the one hand, they testify to
the continuity of religious thought. God's light lighteth
every man that cometh into the world, and the religions
of Egypt and Babylonia illustrate the words of the
evangelist. They form, as it were, the background and
preparation for Judaism and Christianity; Christianity
is the fulfilment, not of the Law only, but of all that was
truest and best in the religions of the ancient world.
In it the beliefs and aspirations of Egypt and Babylonia
have found their explanation and fulfilment. But, on
the other hand, between Judaism and the coarsely polytheistic
religion of Babylonia, as also between Christianity
and the old Egyptian faith,&mdash;in spite of its high morality
and spiritual insight,&mdash;there lies an impassable gulf.
And for the existence of this gulf I can find only one
explanation, unfashionable and antiquated though it be.
In the language of a former generation, it marks the
dividing-line between revelation and unrevealed religion.
It is like that <q>something,</q> hard to define, yet impossible
to deny, which separates man from the ape, even though
on the physiological side the ape may be the ancestor
of the man.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Sayce.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>October 1902.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. The Religion Of Ancient Egypt.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture I. Introduction.</head>

<p>
It was with a considerable amount of diffidence that
I accepted the invitation to deliver a course of lectures
before this University, in accordance with the terms of
Lord Gifford's bequest. Not only is the subject of them
a wide and comprehensive one; it is one, moreover,
which is full of difficulties. The materials upon which
the lectures must be based are almost entirely monumental:
they consist of sculptures and paintings, of
objects buried with the dead or found among the ruins
of temples, and, above all, of texts written in languages
and characters which only a century ago were absolutely
unknown. How fragmentary and mutilated such materials
must be, I need hardly point out. The Egyptian or
Babylonian texts we possess at present are but a tithe of
those which once existed, or even of those which will yet
be discovered. Indeed, so far as the Babylonian texts
are concerned, a considerable proportion of those which
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
have already been stored in the museums of Europe and
America are still undeciphered, and the work of thoroughly
examining them will be the labour of years. And of
those which have been copied and translated, the imperfections
are great. Not infrequently a text is broken
just where it seemed about to throw light on some
problem of religion or history, or where a few more words
were needed in order to explain the sense. Or again,
only a single document may have survived to us out of a
long series, like a single chapter out of a book, leading us
to form a wholly wrong idea of the author's meaning and
the object of the work he had written or compiled. We
all know how dangerous it is to explain a passage apart
from its context, and to what erroneous conclusions such
a practice is likely to lead.
</p>

<p>
And yet it is with such broken and precarious materials
that the student of the religions of the past has to work.
Classical antiquity can give us but little help. In the
literary age of Greece and Rome the ancient religions of
Babylonia and Egypt had passed into their dotage, and
the conceptions on which they were founded had been
transformed or forgotten. What was left of them was
little more than an empty and unintelligible husk, or
even a mere caricature. The gods, in whose name the
kings of Assyria had gone forth to conquer, and in whose
honour Nebuchadrezzar had reared the temples and
palaces of Babylon, had degenerated into the patrons of a
system of magic; the priests, who had once made and
unmade the lords of the East, had become <q>Chaldæan</q>
fortune-tellers, and the religion and science of Babylonia
were remembered only for their connection with astrology.
The old tradition had survived in Egypt with less
apparent alteration, but even there the continuity of
religious belief and teaching was more apparent than
real, external rather than internal; and though the
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Ptolemies and early Roman emperors rebuilt the temples
on the old lines, and allowed themselves to be depicted
in the dress of the Pharaohs, making offerings to gods
whose very names they could not have pronounced, it
was all felt to be but a sham, a dressing up, as it were,
in the clothes of a religion out of which all the spirit and
life had fled.
</p>

<p>
Both in Egypt and in Babylonia, therefore, we are
thrown back upon the monumental texts which the excavator
has recovered from the soil, and the decipherer has
pieced together with infinite labour and patience. At
every step we are brought face to face with the imperfections
of the record, and made aware how much we
have to read into the story, how scanty is the evidence,
how disconnected are the facts. The conclusions we
form must to a large extent be theoretical and provisional,
liable to be revised and modified with the
acquisition of fresh material or a more skilful combination
of what is already known. We are compelled to
interpret the past in the light of the present, to judge
the men of old by the men of to-day, and to explain their
beliefs in accordance with what seem to us the common
and natural opinions of civilised humanity.
</p>

<p>
I need not point out how precarious all such attempts
must necessarily be. There is nothing harder than to
determine the real character of the religion of a people,
even when the religion is still living. We may describe
its outward characteristics, though even these are not
unfrequently a matter of dispute; but the religious ideas
themselves, which constitute its essence, are far more
difficult to grasp and define. Indeed, it is not always
easy for the individual himself to state with philosophical
or scientific precision the religious beliefs which he may
hold. Difficult as it is to know what another man
believes, it is sometimes quite as difficult to know exactly
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
what one believes one's self. Our religious ideas and
beliefs are a heritage which has come to us from the
past, but which has also been influenced and modified by
the experiences we have undergone, by the education we
have received, and, above all, by the knowledge and
tendencies of our age. We seldom attempt to reduce
them into a harmonious whole, to reconcile their inconsistencies,
or to fit them into a consistent system. Beliefs
which go back, it may be, to the ages of barbarism, exist
with but little change by the side of others which are
derived from the latest revelations of physical science;
and our conceptions of a spiritual world are not unfrequently
an ill-assorted mixture of survivals from a
time when the universe was but a small tract of the
earth's surface, with an extinguisher-like firmament above
it, and of the ideas which astronomy has given us of
illimitable space, with its millions of worlds.
</p>

<p>
If it is difficult to understand and describe with
accuracy the religions which are living in our midst, how
much more difficult must it be to understand and
describe the religions that have gone before them, even
when the materials for doing so are at hand! We are
constantly told that the past history of the particular
forms of religion which we profess, has been misunderstood
and misconceived; that it is only now, for example, that
the true history of early Christianity is being discovered
and written, or that the motives and principles underlying
the Reformation are being rightly understood. The
earlier phases in the history of a religion soon become
unintelligible to a later generation. If we would understand
them, we must have not only the materials in which
the record of them has been, as it were, embodied, but also
the seeing eye and the sympathetic mind which will
enable us to throw ourselves back into the past, to see
the world as our forefathers saw it, and to share for a time
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
in their beliefs. Then and then only shall we be able
to realise what the religion of former generations actually
meant, what was its inner essence as well as its outer
form.
</p>

<p>
When, instead of examining and describing a past
phase in the history of a still existing form of faith, we
are called upon to examine and describe a form of faith
which has wholly passed away, our task becomes infinitely
greater. We have no longer the principle of continuity
and development to help us; it is a new plant that we
have to study, not the same plant in an earlier period of
its growth. The fundamental ideas which form, as it
were, its environment, are strange to us; the polytheism
of Babylonia, or the animal-worship of Egypt, transports
us to a world of ideas which stands wholly apart from
that wherein we move. It is difficult for us to put ourselves
in the place of those who saw no underlying unity
in the universe, no single principle to which it could all
be referred, or who believed that the dumb animals were
incarnations of the divine. And yet, until we can do
so, the religions of the two great cultured nations of the
ancient world, the pioneers of the civilisation we enjoy
to-day, will be for us a hopeless puzzle, a labyrinth without
a clue.
</p>

<p>
Before that clue can be found, we must divest ourselves
of our <emph>modernism</emph>. We must go back in thought and
sympathy to the old Orient, and forget, so far as is
possible, the intervening ages of history and development,
and the mental and moral differences between the East
and the West. I say so far as is possible, for the possibility
is relative only. No man can shake off the
influences of the age and country of which he is the
child; we cannot undo our training and education, or
root out the inherited instincts with which we were born.
We cannot put back the hand of time, nor can the
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
Ethiopian change his skin. All we can do is to suppress
our own prejudices, to rid ourselves of baseless assumptions
and prepossessions, and to interpret such evidence as we
have honestly and literally. Above all, we must possess
that power of sympathy, that historical imagination, as
it is sometimes called, which will enable us to realise the
past, and to enter, in some degree, into its feelings and
experiences.
</p>

<p>
The first fact which the historian of religion has to
bear in mind is, that religion and morality are not
necessarily connected together. The recent history of
religion in Western Europe, it is true, has made it
increasingly difficult for us to understand this fact,
especially in days when systems of morality have been
put forward as religions in themselves. But between
religion and morality there is not necessarily any close
tie. Religion has to do with a power outside ourselves,
morality with our conduct one to another. The civilised
nations of the world have doubtless usually regarded the
power that governs the universe as a moral power, and
have consequently placed morality under the sanction of
religion. But the power may also be conceived of as
non-moral, or even as immoral; the blind law of destiny,
to which, according to Greek belief, the gods themselves
were subject, was necessarily non-moral; while certain
Gnostic sects accounted for the existence of evil by the
theory that the creator-god was imperfect, and therefore
evil in his nature. Indeed, the cruelties perpetrated by
what we term nature have seemed to many so contrary
to the very elements of moral law, as to presuppose that
the power which permits and orders them is essentially
immoral. Zoroastrianism divided the world between a
god of good and a god of evil, and held that, under the
present dispensation at all events, the god of evil was, on
the whole, the stronger power.
</p>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<p>
It is strength rather than goodness that primitive
man admires, worships, and fears. In the struggle for
existence, at any rate in its earlier stages, physical strength
plays the most important part. The old instinctive pride
of strength which enabled our first ancestors to battle
successfully against the forces of nature and the beasts
of the forest, still survives in the child and the boy.
The baby still delights to pull off the wings and legs of
the fly that has fallen into its power; and the hero of
the playground is the strongest athlete, and not the best
scholar or the most virtuous of schoolboys. A sudden
outbreak of political fury like that which characterised
the French Revolution shows how thin is the varnish
of conventional morality which covers the passions of
civilised man, and Christian Europe still makes the
battlefield its court of final appeal. Like the lower
animals, man is still governed by the law which dooms
the weaker to extinction or decay, and gives the palm
of victory to the strong. In spite of all that moralists
may say and preach, power and not morality still governs
the world.
</p>

<p>
We need not wonder, therefore, that in the earliest
forms of religion we find little or no traces of the moral
element. What we term morality was, in fact, a slow
growth. It was the necessary result of life in a community.
As long as men lived apart one from the other, there was
little opportunity for its display or evolution. But with the
rise of a community came also the development of a moral
law. In its practical details, doubtless, that law differed
in many respects from the moral law which we profess
to obey to-day. It was only by slow degrees that the
sacredness of the marriage tie or of family life, as we
understand it, came to be recognised. Among certain
tribes of Esquimaux there is still promiscuous intercourse
between the two sexes; and wherever Mohammedanism
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
extends, polygamy, with its attendant degradation of the
woman, is permitted. On the other hand, there are still
tribes and races in which polyandry is practised, and the
child has consequently no father whom it can rightfully
call its own. Until the recent conversion of the Fijians
to Christianity, it was considered a filial duty for the
sons to kill and devour their parents when they had
become too old for work; and in the royal family of
Egypt, as among the Ptolemies who entered on its
heritage, the brother was compelled by law and custom
to marry his sister. Family morality, in fact, if I may
use such an expression, has been slower in its development
than communal morality: it was in the community
and in the social relations of men to one another that
the ethical sense was first developed, and it was from
the community that the newly-won code of morals was
transferred to the family. Man recognised that he was
a moral agent in his dealings with the community to
which he belonged, long before he recognised it as an
individual.
</p>

<p>
Religion, however, has an inverse history. It starts
from the individual, it is extended to the community.
The individual must have a sense of a power outside
himself, whom he is called upon to worship or propitiate,
before he can rise to the idea of tribal gods.
The fetish can be adored, the ancestor addressed in
prayer, before the family has become the tribe, or promiscuous
intercourse has passed into polygamy.
</p>

<p>
The association of morality and religion, therefore, is
not only not a necessity, but it is of comparatively late
origin in the history of mankind. Indeed, the union
of the two is by no means complete even yet. Orthodox
Christianity still maintains that correctness of belief is
at least as important as correctness of behaviour, and
it is not so long ago that men were punished and done
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
to death, not for immoral conduct, but for refusing to
accept some dogma of the Church. In the eyes of the
Creator, the correct statement of abstruse metaphysical
questions was supposed to be of more importance than
the fulfilment of the moral law.
</p>

<p>
The first step in the work of bringing religion and
morality together was to place morality under the
sanction of religion. The rules of conduct which the
experiences of social life had rendered necessary or
advantageous were enforced by an appeal to the terrors
of religious belief. Practices which sinned against the
code of social morality were put under the ban of the
gods and their ministers, and those who ventured to
adopt them were doomed to destruction in this world
and the next. The <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign>, which was originally confined
to reserving certain places and objects for the use of the
divine powers, was invoked for the protection of ethical
laws, or to punish violations of them, and the curse of
heaven was called down not only upon the enemy of
the tribe, but upon the enemy of the moral code of the
tribe as well.
</p>

<p>
Religion thus became tribal as well as personal; the
religious instinct in the individual clothed itself with the
forms of social life, and the religious conceptions which
had gathered round the life of the family were modified
and transferred to the life of the community. It was no
longer only a feeling of fear or reverence on the part of
the individual which made him bow down before the
terrors of the supernatural and obey its behests; to this
were now added all the ties and associations connected
with the life of a tribe. The ethical element was joined
to the religious, and what has been termed the religious
instinct or consciousness in the individual man attached
itself to the rules and laws of ethical conduct. But the
attachment was, in the first instance, more or less
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
accidental; long ages had to pass before the place of
the two elements, the ethical and religious, was reversed,
and the religious sanction of the ethical code was exchanged
for an ethical sanction of religion. It needed
centuries of training before a Christian poet could declare:
<q>He can't be wrong whose life is in the right.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is yet another danger against which we must
guard when dealing with the religions of the past; it
is that of confusing the thoughts and utterances of
individuals with the common religious beliefs of the
communities in which they lived. We are for the most
part dependent on literary materials for our knowledge
of the faiths of the ancient world, and consequently the
danger of which I speak is one to which the historian of
religion is particularly exposed. But it must be remembered
that a literary writer is, by the very fact of his
literary activity, different from the majority of his contemporaries,
and that this difference in the ages before
the invention of printing was greater than it is to-day.
He was not only an educated man; he was also a man
of exceptional culture. He was a man whose thoughts
and sayings were considered worthy of being remembered,
who could think for himself, and whose thoughts were
listened to by others. His abilities or genius raised him
above the ordinary level; his ideas, accordingly, could not
be the ideas of the multitude about him, nor could he,
from the nature of the case, express them in the same
way. The poets or theologians of Egypt and Babylonia
were necessarily original thinkers, and we cannot, therefore,
expect to find in their writings merely a reflection of
the beliefs or superstitions of those among whom they
lived.
</p>

<p>
To reconstruct the religion of Egypt from the literary
works of which a few fragments have come down to us,
would be like reconstructing the religion of this country
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
in the last century from a few tattered pages of Hume or
Burns, of Dugald Stewart or Sir Walter Scott. The
attempts to show that ancient Egyptian religion was a
sublime monotheism, or an enlightened pantheism which
disguised itself in allegories and metaphors, have their
origin in a confusion between the aspirations of individual
thinkers and the actual religion of their time. There are
indeed literary monuments rescued from the wreck of
ancient Egyptian culture which embody the highest and
most spiritual conceptions of the Godhead, and use the
language of the purest monotheism. But such monuments
represent the beliefs and ideas of the cultured
few rather than of the Egyptians as a whole, or even
of the majority of the educated classes. They set before
us the highest point to which the individual Egyptian
could attain in his spiritual conceptions&mdash;not the
religion of the day as it was generally believed and
practised. To regard them as representing the popular
faith of Egypt, would be as misleading as to suppose that
Socrates or Plato were faithful exponents of Athenian
religion.
</p>

<p>
That this view of the literary monuments of ancient
Egypt is correct, can be shown from two concrete instances.
On the one side, there is the curious attempt
made by Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, of the Eighteenth Dynasty,
to revolutionise Egyptian religion, and to replace the old
religion of the State by a sort of monotheistic pantheism.
The hymns addressed to the solar disk&mdash;the visible
symbol of the new God&mdash;breathe an exalted spirituality,
and remind us of passages in the Hebrew Scriptures.
<q>O God,</q> we read in one of them. <q>O God, who in truth
art the living one, who standest before our eyes; thou
created that which was not, thou formest it all</q>; <q>We
also have come into being through the word of thy
mouth.</q>
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
But all such language was inspired by a cult which
was not Egyptian, and which the Egyptians themselves
regarded as an insult to their national deity, and a
declaration of war against the priesthood of Thebes.
Hardly was its royal patron consigned to his tomb when
the national hatred burst forth against those who still
adhered to the new faith; the temple and city of the
solar disk were levelled with the ground, and the body
of the heretic Pharaoh himself was torn in pieces. Had
the religious productions of the court of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
alone survived to us, we should have formed out of
them a wholly false picture of the religion of ancient
Egypt, and ascribed to it doctrines which were held only
by a few individuals at only one short period of its
history,&mdash;doctrines, moreover, which were detested and
bitterly resented by the orthodox adherents of the old
creeds.
</p>

<p>
My other example is taken from a class of literature
which exists wherever there is a cultured society and an
ancient civilisation. It is the literature of scepticism, of
those minds who cannot accept the popular notions of
divinity, who are critically contemptuous of time-honoured
traditions, and who find it impossible to reconcile the
teaching of the popular cult with the daily experiences
of life. It is not so much that they deny or oppose the
doctrines of the official creed, as that they ignore them.
Their scepticism is that of Epicurus rather than of the
French encyclopædists. Let the multitude believe in
its gods and its priests, so long as they themselves are
not forced to do the same.
</p>

<p>
Egypt had its literary sceptics like Greece or Rome.
Listen, for instance, to the so-called Song of the
Harper, written as long ago as the age of the Eleventh
Dynasty, somewhere about 2500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> This is how a
part of it runs in Canon Rawnsley's metrical translation,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
which faithfully preserves the spirit and sense of the
original&mdash;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Notes for the Nile</hi>, pp. 188, 189.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>What is fortune? say the wise.</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vanished are the hearths and homes;</l>
<l>What he does or thinks, who dies,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>None to tell us comes</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eat and drink in peace to-day,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When you go your goods remain;</l>
<l>He who fares the last long way,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Comes not back again.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The Song of the Harper is not the only fragment of
the sceptical literature of Egypt which we possess. At
a far later date, a treatise was written in which, under
the thinly-veiled form of a fable the dogmas of the
national faith were controverted and overthrown. It
takes the form of a dialogue between an Ethiopian cat&mdash;the
representative of all that was orthodox and respectable
in Egyptian society&mdash;and a jackal, who is made
the mouthpiece of heretical unbelief.<note place='foot'>Révillout in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue égyptologique</hi>, i. 4, ii. 3.</note> But it is clear
that the sympathies of the author are with the sceptic
rather than with the believer; and it is the cat and not
the jackal who is worsted in argument. In this first
controversy between authority and reason, authority thus
comes off second best, and just as Epicurus has a predecessor
in the author of the Song of the Harper, so
Voltaire has a predecessor in the author of the dialogue.
</p>

<p>
Here, again, it is obvious that if only these two specimens
of Egyptian theological literature had been
preserved, we should have carried away with us a very
erroneous idea of ancient Egyptian belief&mdash;or unbelief.
Who could have imagined that the Egyptians were a
people who had elaborated a minutely-detailed description
of the world beyond the grave, and who believed
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
more intensely perhaps than any other people has done
either before or since in a future life? Who could have
supposed that their religion inculcated a belief not only
in the immortality of the soul or spirit, but in the
resurrection of the body as well; and that they painted
the fields of the blessed to which they looked forward
after death as a happier and a sunnier Egypt, a land of
light and gladness, of feasting and joy? We cannot
judge what Egyptian religion was like merely from the
writings of some of its literary men, or build upon them
elaborate theories as to what priest and layman believed.
In dealing with the fragments of Egyptian literature, we
must ever bear in mind that they represent, not the
ideas of the mass of the people, but the conceptions of
the cultured few.
</p>

<p>
But there is still another error into which we may
fall. It is that of attaching too literal a meaning to the
language of theology. The error is the natural result of
the reaction from the older methods of interpretation,
which found allegories in the simplest of texts, and
mystical significations in the plainest words. The
application of the scientific method to the records of
the past brought with it a recognition that an ancient
writer meant what he said quite as much as a writer
of to-day, and that to read into his language the arbitrary
ideas of a modern hierophant might be an attractive
pastime, but not a serious occupation. Before we can
hope to understand the literature of the past, we must
try to discover what is its literal and natural meaning,
unbiassed by prejudices or prepossessions, or even by the
authority of great names. Theologians have been too
fond of availing themselves of the ambiguities of language,
and of seeing in a text more than its author either knew
or dreamt of. Unless we have express testimony to the
contrary, it is no more permissible to find parables and
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
metaphorical expressions in an old Egyptian book than it
is in the productions of the modern press.
</p>

<p>
But, on the other hand, it is possible to press this
literalism too far. Language, it has been said, is a
storehouse of faded metaphors; and if this is true of
language in general, it is still more true of theological
language. We can understand the spiritual and the
abstract only through the help of the material; the
words by which we denote them must be drawn, in the
first instance, from the world of the senses. Just as in
the world of sense itself the picture that we see or the
music that we hear comes to us through the nerves of
sight and hearing, so all that we know or believe of the
moral and spiritual world is conveyed to us through
sensuous and material channels. Thought is impossible
without the brain through which it can act, and we
cannot convey to others or even to ourselves our conceptions
of right and wrong, of beauty and goodness,
without having recourse to analogies from the world of
phenomena, to metaphor and imagery, to parable and
allegory. What is <q>conception</q> itself but a <q>grasping
with both hands,</q> or <q>parable</q> but a <q>throwing by the
side of</q>? If we would deal with the spiritual and
moral, we <emph>must</emph> have recourse to metaphorical forms of
speech. A religion is necessarily built up on a foundation
of metaphor.
</p>

<p>
To interpret such metaphors in their purely natural
sense would therefore land us in gross error. Unfortunately,
modern students of the religious history of
the past have not always been careful to avoid doing so.
Misled by the fact that language often enshrines old
beliefs and customs which have otherwise passed out of
memory, they have forgotten that a metaphor is not
necessarily a survival, or a survival a metaphor. In the
hieroglyphic texts discovered in the Pyramids of the
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
sixth Egyptian dynasty, Sahu or Orion, the huntsman of
the skies, is said to eat the great gods in the morning,
the lesser gods at noon and the smaller ones at night,
roasting their flesh in the vast ovens of the heavens; and
it has been hastily concluded that this points to a time
when the ancestors of the historical Egyptians actually
did eat human flesh. It would be just as reasonable to
conclude from the language of the Eucharistic Office that
the members of the Christian Church were once addicted
to cannibalism. Eating and drinking are very obvious
metaphors, and there are even languages in which the
word <q>to eat</q> has acquired the meaning <q>to exist</q>.<note place='foot'>For the extraordinary variety of senses in which the verb <foreign rend='italic'>ye</foreign>, <q>to
eat,</q> has come to be used in the African language of Akra, see Pott,
<hi rend='italic'>Ueber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues von Wilhelm von
Humboldt</hi>, ii. pp. 495-498 (1876). Thus <foreign rend='italic'>ye no</foreign>, <q>to be master,</q> is
literally <q>to eat the upper side</q>; <foreign rend='italic'>ye gbî</foreign>, <q>to live</q> or <q>exist,</q> is
literally <q>to eat a day</q>; <foreign rend='italic'>feî ye</foreign>, <q>to be cold,</q> is <q>to eat cold.</q></note>
I remember hearing of a tribe who believed that we
worshipped a lamb because of the literal translation into
their language of the phrase, <q>O Lamb of God.</q>
Theology is full of instances in which the language it
uses has been metaphorical from the outset, and the
endeavour to interpret it with bald literality, and to see
in it the fossilised ideas and practices of the past, would
end in nothing but failure. Christianity is not the only
religion which has consciously employed parable for
inculcating the truths it professes to teach. Buddhism
has done the same, and the <q>Parables of Buddhagosha</q>
have had a wider influence than all the other volumes of
the Buddhist Canon.
</p>

<p>
Survivals there undoubtedly are in theological language
as in all other forms of language, and one of the hardest
tasks of the student of ancient religion is to determine
where they really exist. Is the symbolism embodied in
a word or an expression of primary or secondary origin?
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
Was it from the very beginning a symbol and metaphor
intended to be but the sensuous channel through which
some perception of divine truth could be conveyed to us,
or does it reflect the manners and thought of an earlier
age of society, which has acquired a symbolical significance
with the lapse of centuries? When the primitive Aryan
gave the Being whom he worshipped the name of Dyaus,
from a root which signified <q>to be bright,</q> did he
actually see in the bright firmament the divinity he
adored, or was the title a metaphorical one expressive
only of the fact that the power outside himself was
bright and shining like the sun? The Babylonians
pictured their gods in the image of man: did Babylonian
religion accordingly begin with the worship of deified
ancestors, or were the human figures mere symbols and
images denoting that the highest conception man could
form of his creator was that of a being like himself?
The answer to these questions, which it has been of late
years the fashion to seek in modern savagery, is inconclusive.
It has first to be proved that modern savagery
is not due to degeneration rather than to arrested
development, and that the forefathers of the civilised
nations of the ancient world were ever on the same level
as the savage of to-day. In fact the savage of to-day
is not, and cannot be, a representative of primitive man.
If the ordinary doctrine of development is right, primitive
man would have known nothing of those essentials of
human life and progress of which no savage community
has hitherto been found to be destitute. He would have
known nothing of the art of producing fire, nothing
of language, without which human society would be
impossible. On the other hand, if the civilised races of
mankind possessed from the outset the germs of culture
and the power to develop it, they can in no way be
compared with the savages of the modern world, who
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
have lived, generation after generation, stationary and
unprogressive, like the beasts that perish, even though at
times they may have been in contact with a higher
civilisation. To explain the religious beliefs and usages
of the Greeks and Romans from the religious ideas and
customs of Australians or Hottentots, is in most cases
but labour in vain, and to seek the origin of Semitic
religion in the habits and superstitions of low-caste
Bedâwin, is like looking to the gipsies for an explanation
of European Christianity. Such a procedure is the abuse,
not the use, of the anthropological method. Folk-lore
gives us a key to the mind of the child, and of the childlike
portion of society; it sheds no light on the beginnings
either of religion or of civilisation, and to make it do so
is to mistake a will-o'-the-wisp for a beacon-light. It is
once more to find <q>survivals</q> where they exist only in
the mind of the inquirer. So long as civilised society
has lasted, it has contained the ignorant as well as the
learned, the fool as well as the wise man, and we are no
more justified in arguing from the ignorance of the past
than we should be in arguing from the ignorance of the
present. So far as folk-tales genuinely reflect the mind
of the unlearned and childlike only, they are of little
help to the student of the religions of the ancient
civilised world.
</p>

<p>
We must, then, beware of discovering allegory and
symbol where they do not exist; we must equally
beware of overlooking them where they are actually to
be found. And we must remember that, although the
metaphors and symbolism of the earlier civilisations are
not likely to be those which seem natural to the modern
European, this is no reason why we should deny the
existence of them. In fact, without them religious
language and beliefs are impossible; it is only through
the world of the senses that a way lies to a knowledge
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
of the world beyond. The conditions into which we
were born necessitate our expressing and realising our
mental, moral, and religious conceptions through sensuous
imagery and similitude. Only we must never forget
that the imagery is not the same for different races or
generations of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Before concluding, I must say a few words in explanation
of the title I have given to the course of lectures I
have the honour of delivering before you. It is not my
intention to give a systematic description or analysis of
the ancient religions of Egypt and Babylonia. That
would hardly be in keeping with the terms of Lord
Gifford's bequest, nor would the details be interesting,
except to a small company of specialists. Indeed, in the
case of the ancient religion of Babylonia, the details are
still so imperfect and disputed, that a discussion of them
is fitted rather for the pages of a learned Society's
journal than for a course of lectures. What the lecturer
has to do is to take the facts that have been already
ascertained, to see to what conclusions they point, and to
review the theories which they countenance or condemn.
The names and number of the gods and goddesses
worshipped by the Egyptians and Babylonians is of little
moment to the scientific student of religion: what he
wants to know is the conception of the deity which
underlay these manifold forms, and the relation in which
man was believed to stand to the divine powers around
him. What was it that the civilised Babylonian or
Egyptian meant by the term <q>god</q>? What was the
idea or belief that lay behind the polytheism of the
popular cult, and in what respects is it marked off from
the ideas and beliefs that rule the religions of our modern
world? The old Egyptian, indeed, might not have understood
what we mean by <q>polytheism</q> and <q>monotheism,</q>
but would he not have already recognised the two
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
tendencies of thought which have found expression among
us in these words? Was St. Paul right when he
declared that the old civilised nations had sought after
the God of Christianity, <q>if haply they might feel after
Him and find Him,</q> or is there an impassable gulf
between the religious conceptions of paganism and those
of Christian Europe? Such are some of the questions to
whose solution I trust that the facts I have to bring
before you may contribute, in however humble a degree.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture II. Egyptian Religion.</head>

<p>
It is through its temples and tombs that ancient Egypt
is mainly known to us. It is true that the warm and
rainless climate of Upper Egypt has preserved many of
the objects of daily life accidentally buried in the ruins
of its cities, and that even fragments of fragile papyrus
have come from the mounds that mark the sites of its
villages and towns; but these do not constitute even
a tithe of the monuments upon which our present
knowledge of ancient Egyptian life and history has been
built. It is from the tombs and temples that we have
learned almost all we now know about the Egypt of the
past. The tombs were filled with offerings to the dead
and illustrations of the daily life of the living, while
their walls were adorned with representations of the
scenes at which their possessor had been present, with
the history of his life, or with invocations to the gods.
The temples were storehouses of religious lore, which
was sculptured or painted on their walls and ceilings.
In fact, we owe most of our knowledge of ancient
Egypt to the gods and to the dead; and it is natural,
therefore, that the larger part of it should be concerned
with religion and the life to come.
</p>

<p>
We are thus in an exceptionally good position for
ascertaining, at all events in outline, the religious ideas
of the old Egyptians, and even for tracing their history
through long periods of time. The civilisation of Egypt
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
goes back to a remote past, and recent discoveries have
carried us almost to its beginnings. The veil which so
long covered the origin of Egyptian culture is at last
being drawn aside, and some of the most puzzling inconsistencies
in the religion, which formed so integral
a part of that culture, are being explained. We have
learnt that the religion of the Egypt which is best known
to us was highly composite, the product of different
races and different streams of culture and thought; and
the task of uniting them all into a homogeneous whole
was never fully completed. To the last, Egyptian religion
remained a combination of ill-assorted survivals rather
than a system, a confederation of separate cults rather
than a definite theology. Like the State, whatever unity
it possessed was given to it by the Pharaoh, who was
not only a son and representative of the sun-god, but
the visible manifestation of the sun-god himself. Its
unity was thus a purely personal one: without the
Pharaoh the Egyptian State and Egyptian religion would
alike have been dissolved into their original atoms.
</p>

<p>
The Pharaonic Egyptians&mdash;the Egyptians, that is to
say, who embanked the Nile, who transformed the marsh
and the desert into cultivated fields, who built the
temples and tombs, and left behind them the monuments
we associate with Egyptian culture&mdash;seem to have come
from Asia; and it is probable that their first home was
in Babylonia. The race (or races) they found in the
valley of the Nile were already possessed of a certain
measure of civilisation. They were in an advanced stage
of neolithic culture; their flint tools are among the finest
that have ever been made; and they were skilled in the
manufacture of vases of the hardest stone. But they
were pastoral rather than agricultural, and they lived in
the desert rather than on the river-bank. They proved
no match for the newcomers, with their weapons of
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
copper; and, little by little, the invading race succeeded
in making itself master of the valley of the Nile, though
tradition remembered the fierce battles which were
needed before the <q>smiths</q> who followed Horus could
subjugate the older population in their progress from
south to north.
</p>

<p>
How far the invaders themselves formed a single race
is still uncertain. Some scholars believe that, besides
the Asiatics who entered Egypt from the south, crossing
the Red Sea and so marching through the eastern
desert to the Nile, there were other Asiatics who came
overland from Mesopotamia, and made their way into
the Delta across the isthmus of Suez. Of this overland
invasion, however, I can myself see no evidence; so far
as our materials at present allow us to go, the Egyptians
of history were composed, at most, of three elements, the
Asiatic invaders from the south, and two older races,
which we may term aboriginal. One of them Professor
Petrie is probably right in maintaining to be Libyan.<note place='foot'>See Schweinfurth, <q>Ueber den Ursprung der Aegypter,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner anthropologischen Gesellschaft</hi>, June 1897.</note>
</p>

<p>
We thus have at least three different types of religious
belief and practice at the basis of Egyptian religion,
corresponding with the three races which together made
up the Egyptian people. Two of the types would be
African; the third would be Asiatic, perhaps Babylonian.
From the very outset, therefore, we must be prepared
to find divergences of religious conception as well as
divergences in rites and ceremonies. And such divergences
can be actually pointed out.<note place='foot'>See W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Religion and Conscience in Ancient
Egypt</hi>, 1898.</note>
</p>

<p>
The practice of embalming, for instance, is one which
we have been accustomed to think peculiarly characteristic
of ancient Egypt. It is referred to in the Book of
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
Genesis, and described by classical writers. There are
many people whose acquaintance with the old Egyptians
is confined to the fact that when they died their bodies
were made into mummies. It is from the wrappings of
the mummy that most of the small amulets and scarabs
have come which fill so large a space in collections of
Egyptian antiquities, as well as many of the papyri
which have given us an insight into the literature of the
past. We have been taught to believe that from times
immemorial the Egyptians mummified their dead, and
that the practice was connected with an equally immemorial
faith in the resurrection of the dead; and yet
recent excavations have made it clear that such a belief
is erroneous. Mummification was never universal in
Egypt, and there was a time when it was not practised
at all. It was unknown to the prehistoric populations
whom the Pharaonic Egyptians found on their arrival in
the country; and among the Pharaonic Egyptians themselves
it seems to have spread only slowly. Few traces
of it have been met with before the age of the Fourth
and Fifth Dynasties, if, indeed, any have been met with
at all.
</p>

<p>
But, as we shall see hereafter, the practice of mummification
was closely bound up with a belief in the
resurrection of the dead. The absence of it accordingly
implies that this belief was either non-existent, or, at all
events, did not as yet occupy a prominent place in the
Egyptian creed. Like embalming, it must have been
introduced by the Pharaonic Egyptians; it was not until
the older races of the country had been absorbed by
their conquerors that mummification became general,
along with the religious ideas that were connected with
it. Before the age of the Eighteenth Dynasty it seems
to have been practically confined to the court and the
official priesthood.
</p>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<p>
On the other hand, one at least of the prehistoric
races appears to have practised secondary burial. The
skeletons discovered in its graves have been mutilated
in an extraordinary manner. The skull, the legs, the
arms, the feet, and the hands have been found dissevered
from the trunk; even the backbone itself is
sometimes broken into separate portions; and there are
cases in which the whole skeleton is a mere heap of
dismembered bones. But, in spite of this dismemberment,
the greatest care has been taken to preserve the
separate fragments, which are often placed side by side.
An explanation of the dismemberment has been sought
in cannibalism, but cannibals do not take the trouble
to collect the bones of their victims and bury them
with all the marks of respect; moreover, the bones
have not been gnawed except in one or two examples,
where wild beasts rather than man must have been
at work. It seems evident, therefore, that the race
whose dismembered remains have thus been found in
so many of the prehistoric cemeteries of Egypt, allowed
the bodies of the dead to remain unburied until the
flesh had been stripped from their bones by the birds
and beasts of prey, and that it was only when this
had been done that the sun-bleached bones were consigned
to the tomb. Similar practices still prevail in
certain parts of the world; apart from the Parsi <q>towers
of silence,</q> it is still the custom in New Guinea to leave
the corpse among the branches of a tree until the flesh
is entirely destroyed.<note place='foot'><q>The custom of dismembering the body or stripping it of its flesh
is widely spread: the neolithic tombs of Italy contain skulls and bones
which have been painted red; Baron de Baye has found in the tombs of
Champagne skeletons stripped of their flesh, and the Patagonians and
Andamanners as well as the New Zealanders still practise the custom</q>
(De Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Egypte</hi>, ii. p. 142). Secondary
burial is met with in India among the Kullens, the Kâthkaris, and the
Agariya, as well as in Motu, Melanesia, Sarawak, the Luchu Islands,
Torres Straits, and Ashanti, while <q>in some of the English long barrows
the bones appear to have been flung in pell-mell</q> (Crooke in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxix. pp. 284-286 (1899)).</note>
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<p>
Between mummification and secondary burial no
reconciliation is possible. The conceptions upon which
the two practices rest are contradictory one to the other.
In the one case every effort is made to keep the body
intact and to preserve the flesh from decay; in the
other case the body is cast forth to the beasts of the
desert and the fowls of the air, and its very skeleton
allowed to be broken up. A people who practised
secondary burial can hardly have believed in a future
existence of the body itself. Their belief must rather
have been in the existence of that shadowy, vapour-like
form, comparable to the human breath, in which
so many races of mankind have pictured to themselves
the imperishable part of man. It was the misty ghost,
seen in dreams or detected at night amid the shadows
of the forest, that survived the death of the body; the
body itself returned to the earth from whence it had
sprung.
</p>

<p>
This prehistoric belief left its traces in the official
religion of later Egypt. The <foreign rend='italic'>Ba</foreign> or <q>Soul,</q> with the
figure of a bird and the head of a man, is its direct
descendant. As we shall see, the conception of the <foreign rend='italic'>Ba</foreign>
fits but ill with that of the mummy, and the harmonistic
efforts of a later date were unable altogether to hide
the inner contradiction that existed between them. The
soul, which fled on the wings of a bird to the world
beyond the sky, was not easily to be reconciled with
the mummified body which was eventually to lead a
life in the other world that should be a repetition and
reflection of its life in this. How the <foreign rend='italic'>Ba</foreign> and the
mummy were to be united, the official cult never
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
endeavoured to explain; the task was probably beyond
its powers. It was content to leave the two conceptions
side by side, bidding the individual believer reconcile
them as best he could.
</p>

<p>
The fact illustrates another which must always be
kept in mind in dealing with Egyptian religion. Up
to the last it remained without a philosophic system.
There were, it is true, certain sides of it which were
reduced to systems, certain parts of the official creed
which became philosophies. But as a whole it was
a loosely-connected agglomeration of beliefs and practices
which had come down from the past, and one after the
other had found a place in the religion of the State.
No attempt was ever made to form them into a coherent
and homogeneous whole, or to find a philosophic basis
upon which they all might rest. Such an idea, indeed,
never occurred to the Egyptian. He was quite content
to take his religion as it had been handed down to
him, or as it was prescribed by the State; he had none
of that inner retrospection which distinguishes the Hindu,
none of that desire to know the causes of things which
characterised the Greek. The contradictions which we
find in the articles of his creed never troubled him;
he never perceived them, or if he did they were ignored.
He has left to us the task of finding a philosophic basis
for his faith, and of fixing the central ideas round which
it revolved; the task is a hard one, and it is rendered
the harder by the imperfection of our materials.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian was no philosopher, but he had an
immense veneration for the past. The past, indeed,
was ever before him; he could not escape from it.
Objects and monuments which would have perished in
other countries were preserved almost in their pristine
freshness by the climate under which he lived. As
to-day, so too in the age of the Pharaohs, the earliest
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
and the latest of things jostled one another, and it was
often difficult to say which of the two looked the older.
The past was preserved in a way that it could not be
elsewhere; nothing perished except by the hand of man.
And man, brought up in such an atmosphere of continuity,
became intensely conservative. Nature itself
only increased the tendency. The Nile rose and fell
with monotonous regularity; year after year the seasons
succeeded each other without change; and the agriculturist
was not dependent on the variable alternations
of rain and sunshine, or even of extreme heat and cold.
In Egypt, accordingly, the new grew up and was adopted
without displacing the old. It was a land to which the
rule did not apply that <q>the old order changeth, giving
place to new.</q> The old order might, indeed, change,
through foreign invasion or the inventions of human
genius, but all the same it did not give place to the
new. The new simply took a place by the side of the
old.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian system of writing is a striking illustration
of the fact. All the various stages through which
writing must pass, in its development out of pictures
into alphabetic letters, exist in it side by side. The
hieroglyphs can be used at once ideographically, syllabically,
and alphabetically. And what is true of Egyptian
writing is true also of Egyptian religion. The various
elements out of which it arose are all still traceable in
it; none of them has been discarded, however little it
might harmonise with the elements with which it has
been combined. Religious ideas which belong to the
lowest and to the highest forms of the religious consciousness,
to races of different origin and different age,
exist in it side by side.
</p>

<p>
It is true that even in organised religions we find
similar combinations of heterogeneous elements. Survivals
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
from a distant past are linked in them with
the conceptions of a later age, and beliefs of divergent
origin have been incorporated by them into the same
creed. But it is a definite and coherent creed into
which they have been embodied; the attempt has been
made to fuse them into a harmonious whole, and to
explain away their apparent divergencies and contradictions.
Either the assertion is made that the creed of
the present has come down unchanged from the past, or
else it is maintained that the doctrines and rites of the
past have developed normally and gradually into those
of the present.
</p>

<p>
But the Egyptian made no such endeavour. He
never realised that there was any necessity for making
it. It was sufficient that a thing should have descended
to him from his ancestors for it to be true, and he
never troubled himself about its consistency with other
parts of his belief. He accepted it as he accepted the
inconsistencies and inequalities of life, without any effort
to work them into a harmonious theory or form them
into a philosophic system. His religion was like his
temples, in which the art and architecture of all the past
centuries of his history existed side by side. All that
the past had bequeathed to him must be preserved, if
possible; it might be added to, but not modified or
destroyed.
</p>

<p>
It is curious that the same spirit has prevailed in
modern Egypt. The native never restores. If a building
or the furniture within it goes to decay, no attempt
is made to mend or repair it; it is left to moulder on in
the spot where it stands, while a new building or a new
piece of furniture is set up beside it. That the new
and the old should not agree together&mdash;should, in fact,
be in glaring contrast&mdash;is a matter of no moment. This
veneration for the past, which preserves without repairing
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
or modifying or even adapting to the surroundings of the
present, is a characteristic which is deeply engrained in
the mind of the Egyptian. It had its prior origin in
the physical and climatic conditions of the country in
which he was born, and has long since become a leading
characteristic of his race.
</p>

<p>
Along with the inability to take a general view of the
beliefs he held, and to reduce them to a philosophic
system, went an inability to form abstract ideas. This
inability, again, may be traced to natural causes. Thanks
to the perpetual sunshine of the valley of the Nile, the
Egyptian leads an open-air life. Except for the purpose
of sleep, his house is of little use to him, and in the
summer months even his sleep is usually taken on the
roof. He thus lives constantly in the light and warmth
of a southern sun, in a land where the air is so dry and
clear that the outlines of the most distant objects are
sharp and distinct, and there is no melting of shadow
into light, such as characterises our northern climes.
Everything is clear; nothing is left to the imagination;
and the sense of sight is that which is most frequently
brought into play. It is what the Egyptian sees rather
than what he hears or handles that impresses itself upon
his memory, and it is through his eyes that he recognises
and remembers.
</p>

<p>
At the same time this open-air life is by no means
one of leisure. The peculiar conditions of the valley of
the Nile demand incessant labour on the part of its
population. Fruitful as the soil is when once it is
watered, without water it remains a barren desert or an
unwholesome marsh. And the only source of water is
the river Nile. The Nile has to be kept within its
banks, to be diverted into canals, or distributed over the
fields by irrigating machines, before a single blade of
wheat can grow or a single crop be gathered in. Day
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
after day must the Egyptian labour, repairing the dykes
and canals, ploughing the ground, planting the seed, and
incessantly watering it; the Nile is ready to take advantage
of any relaxation of vigilance and toil, to submerge
or sweep away the cultivated land, or to deny to it the
water that it needs. Of all people the Egyptian is the
most industrious; the conditions under which he has to
till the soil oblige him to be so, and to spend his existence
in constant agricultural work.
</p>

<p>
But, as I have already pointed out, this work is
monotonously regular. There are no unexpected breaks
in it; no moments when a sudden demand is made for
exceptional labour. The farmer's year is all mapped
out for him beforehand: what his forefathers have done
for unnumbered centuries before him, he too has to do
almost to a day. It is steady toil, day after day, from
dawn to night, during the larger portion of the year.
</p>

<p>
This steady toil in the open air gives no opportunity
for philosophic meditation or introspective theorising.
On the contrary, life for the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>fellah</foreign> is a very
real and practical thing: he knows beforehand what he
has to do in order to gain his bread, and he has no time
in which to theorise about it. It is, moreover, his sense
of sight which is constantly being exercised. The things
which he knows and remembers are the things which he
sees, and he sees them clearly in the clear sunshine of
his fields.
</p>

<p>
We need not wonder, therefore, that the ancient
Egyptian should have shown on the one hand an
incapacity for abstract thought, and on the other hand
a love of visible symbols. The two, in fact, were but
the reverse sides of the same mental tendency. Symbolism,
indeed, is always necessary before we can
apprehend the abstract: it is only through the sensuous
symbol that we can express the abstract thought. But
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
the Egyptian did not care to penetrate beyond the
expression. He was satisfied with the symbol which he
could see and remember, and the result was that his
religious ideas were material rather than spiritual. The
material husk, as it were, sufficed for him, and he did
not trouble to inquire too closely about the kernel
within. The soul was for him a human-headed bird,
which ascended on its wings to the heavens above; and
the future world itself was but a duplicate of the Egypt
which his eyes gazed upon below.
</p>

<p>
The hieroglyphic writing was at once an illustration
and an encouragement of this characteristic of his mind.
All abstract ideas were expressed in it by symbols which
he could see and understand. The act of eating was
denoted by the picture of a man with his hand to his
mouth, the idea of wickedness by the picture of a sparrow.
And these symbolic pictures were usually attached to
the words they represented, even when the latter had
come to be syllabically and alphabetically spelt. Even
in reading and writing, therefore, the Egyptian was not
required to concern himself overmuch with abstract
thought. The concrete symbols were ever before his
eyes, and it was their mental pictures which took the
place for him of abstract ideas.
</p>

<p>
It must, of course, be remembered that the foregoing
generalisations apply to the Egyptian people as a whole.
There were individual exceptions; there was even a class
the lives of whose members were not devoted to agricultural
or other labour, and whose religious conceptions
were often spiritual and sublime. This was the class of
priests, whose power and influence increased with the
lapse of time, and who eventually moulded the official
theology of Egypt. Priestly colleges arose in the great
sanctuaries of the country, and gradually absorbed a
considerable part of its land and revenues. At first the
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
priests do not seem to have been a numerous body, and
up to the last the higher members of the hierarchy were
comparatively few. But in their hands the religious
beliefs of the people underwent modification, and even a
rudimentary systematisation; the different independent
cults of the kingdom were organised and combined
together, and with this organisation came philosophic
speculation and theorising. If Professor Maspero is
right, the two chief schools of religious thought and
systematising in early Egypt were at Heliopolis, near
the apex of the Delta, and Hermopolis, the modern
Eshmunên, in Central Egypt. In Hermopolis the
conception of creation, not by voice merely, but even by
the mere sound of the voice, was first formed and worked
out while Heliopolis was the source of that arrangement
of the deities into groups of nine which led to the
identification of the gods one with another, and so
prepared the way for monotheism.<note place='foot'>See Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii.
p. 372 sqq.</note> If Heliopolis were
indeed, as seems probable, the first home of this religious
theory, its influence upon the rest of Egypt was profound.
Already in the early part of the historical period, in the
age of the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties, when the religious
texts of the Pyramids were compiled, the scheme which
placed the Ennead or group of nine at the head of the
Pantheon had been accepted throughout the country. It
was the beginning of an inevitable process of thought,
which ended by resolving the deities of the official cult
into forms or manifestations one of the other, and by
landing its adherents in pantheism.
</p>

<p>
To a certain extent, therefore, the general incapacity for
abstract thought which distinguished the Egyptians did
not hold good of the priestly colleges. But even among
the priests the abstract was never entirely dissociated
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
from the symbol. Symbolism still dominates the profoundest
thoughts and expressions of the later inscriptions;
the writer cannot free himself from the sensuous
image, except perhaps in a few individual cases. At
the most, Egyptian thought cannot rise further than the
conception of <q>the god who has no form</q>&mdash;a confession
in itself of inability to conceive of what is formless.
It is true that after the rise of the Eighteenth
Dynasty the deity is addressed as <foreign rend='italic'>Kheper zes-ef</foreign>, <q>that
which is self-grown,</q> <q>the self-existent</q>; but when we
find the same epithet applied also to plants like the
balsam and minerals like saltpetre, it is clear that it
does not possess the abstract significance we should read
into it to-day. It simply expresses the conviction that
the god to whom the prayer is offered is a god who was
never born in human fashion, but who grew up of himself,
like the mineral which effloresces from the ground,
or the plant which is not grown from seed. Similarly,
when it is said of him that he is <q>existent from the
beginning,</q>&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>kheper em ḥat</foreign>,&mdash;or, as it is otherwise expressed,
that he is <q>the father of the beginning,</q> the
phrase is less abstract than it seems at first sight to be.
The very word <foreign rend='italic'>kheper</foreign> or <q>existent</q> denotes the visible
universe, while <foreign rend='italic'>ḥat</foreign> or <q>beginning</q> is the hinder extremity.
The phrase can be pressed just as little as the
epithet <q>lord of eternity,</q> applied to deities whose birth
and death are nevertheless asserted in the same breath.
Perhaps the most abstract conception of the divine to
which the Egyptian attained was that of <q>the nameless
one,</q> since the name was regarded as something very
real and concrete, as, in fact, the essence of that to
which it belonged. To say, therefore, that a thing was
nameless, was equivalent to either denying its existence
or to lifting it out of the world of the concrete altogether.
</p>

<p>
There was a moment in the history of Egypt when
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
an attempt was made to put a real signification into the
apparently abstract terms and phrases addressed to the
gods. The Pharaoh Khu-n-Aten, towards the close of
the Eighteenth Dynasty, appears suddenly on the scene
as a royal reformer, determined to give life and meaning
to the language which had described the supreme deity
as <q>the sole and only god,</q> the absolute ruler of the
universe, who was from all eternity, and whose form was
hidden from men. But the impulse to the reform came
from Asia. Khu-n-Aten's mother was a foreigner, and
his attempt to engraft Asiatic ideas upon Egyptian
religion, or rather to substitute an Asiatic form of faith
for that of his fathers, proved a failure. The worship
of the one supreme deity, whose visible symbol was the
solar disc, though enforced by persecution and by all the
power of the Pharaoh himself, hardly survived his death.
Amon of Thebes and his priesthood came victorious out
of the struggle, and the pantheistic monotheism of Khu-n-Aten
was never revived. Symbolism remained, while
the abstract thought, to which that symbolism should
have been a stepping-stone, failed to penetrate into
Egyptian religion. The Egyptian continued to be content
with the symbol, as his father had been before him.
But in the priestly colleges and among the higher circles
of culture it became less materialistic; while the mass of
the people still saw nothing but the symbol itself, the
priests and scribes looked as it were beyond it, and saw
in the symbol the picture of some divine truth, the outward
garment in which the deity had clothed himself.
What constituted, however, the peculiarity of the
Egyptian point of view was, that this outward garment
was never separated from that which it covered; it was
regarded as an integral part of the divine essence, which
could no more be dissociated from it than the surface
of a statue can be dissociated from the stone of which it
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
is made. The educated Egyptian came to see in the
multitudinous gods of the public worship merely varying
manifestations or forms of one divine substance; but
still they were manifestations or forms visible to the
senses, and apart from such forms the divine substance
had no existence. It is characteristic that the old belief
was never disavowed, that images were actually animated
by the gods or human personalities whose likeness they
bore, and whom they were expressively said to have
<q>devoured</q>; indeed, the king still received the <foreign rend='italic'>Sa</foreign> or
principle of immortality from contact with the statue of
the god he served; and wonder-working images, which
inclined the head towards those who asked them questions,
continued to be consulted in the temples.<note place='foot'>See Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et l'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, i.
p. 85 sqq.</note> At
Dendera the soul of the goddess Hathor was believed to
descend from heaven in the form of a hawk of lapis-lazuli
in order to vivify her statue;<note place='foot'>Mariette, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah, Texte</hi>, p. 156.</note> and the belief is a
significant commentary on the mental attitude of her
worshippers.
</p>

<p>
One result of the Egyptian's inability or disinclination
for abstract thought was the necessity not only of representing
the gods under special and definite forms, but
even of always so thinking of them. The system of
writing, with its pictorial characters, favoured the habit;
and we can well understand how difficult the most
educated scribe must have found it to conceive of Thoth
otherwise than as an ibis, or of Hathor otherwise than
as a cow. Whatever may have been the origin of the
Egyptian worship of animals, or&mdash;which is something
very different&mdash;of the identification of certain individual
animals with the principal gods, its continuance was
materially assisted by the sacred writing of the scribes
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
and the pictures that adorned the walls of the temples.
To the ordinary Egyptian, Thoth was indeed an ibis, and
the folk-lore of the great sanctuaries accordingly described
him as such.<note place='foot'>In the Pyramid texts the dead are described as being carried across
the lake which separates this world from the fields of Alu, on the wings
of Thoth.</note> But to the cultured Egyptian, also, the
ibis was his symbol; and in Egypt, as we have seen, the
symbol and what is symbolised were apt to be confounded
together.
</p>

<p>
The beast-worship of Egypt excited the astonishment
and ridicule of the Greeks and Romans, and the unmeasured
scorn of the Christian apologists. I shall have
to deal with it in a later lecture. For the present it is
sufficient to point out how largely it owed its continued
existence to the need for symbolism which characterised
Egyptian thought, in spite of the fact that there was
another and contradictory conception which held sway
within Egyptian religion. This was the conception of
the divinity of man, which found its supreme expression
in the doctrine that the Pharaoh was the incarnation of
the sun-god. It was not in the brute beast, but in man
himself, that the deity revealed himself on earth.
</p>

<p>
The origin of the conception must be sought in the
early history of the country. Egypt was not at first
the united monarchy it afterwards became. It was
divided into a number of small principalities, each independent
of the other and often hostile. It is probable
that in some cases the inhabitants of these principalities
did not belong to the same race; that while in one the
older population predominated, in another the Pharaonic
Egyptians held absolute sway. At all events the manners
and customs of their inhabitants were not uniform,
any more than the religious beliefs they held and the rites
they practised. The god who was honoured in one place
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
was abhorred in another, and a rival deity set over
against him.
</p>

<p>
True to its conservative principles, Egypt never forgot
the existence of these early principalities. They continued
to survive in a somewhat changed form. They
became the nomes of Pharaonic Egypt, separate districts
resembling to a certain degree the States of the American
Republic, and preserving to the last their independent
life and organisation. Each nome had its own capital,
its own central sanctuary, and its own prince; above all,
it had its own special god or goddess, with their attendant
deities, their college of priests, their ceremonies and
their festivals. Up to the age of the Hyksos conquest
the hereditary princes of the nomes were feudal lords,
owning a qualified obedience to the Pharaoh, and furnishing
him with tribute and soldiers when called upon to
do so. It was not till after the rise of the Eighteenth
Dynasty that the old feudal nobility was replaced by
court officials and a bureaucracy which owed its position
to the king; and even then the descendants of the ancient
princes were ever on the watch to take advantage of
the weakness of the central authority and recover the
power they had lost. Up to the last, too, the gods of
the several nomes preserved a semblance of their independent
character. It was only with the rise of the
new kingdom and the accession of the Eighteenth Dynasty
that that process of fusion set in to any real purpose
which identified the various deities one with another,
and transformed them into kaleidoscopic forms of Amon
or Ra. The loss of their separate and independent
character went along with the suppression of the feudal
families with whom their worship had been associated
for unnumbered generations. The feudal god and the
feudal prince disappeared together: the one became
absorbed into the supreme god of the Pharaoh and his
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
priests, the other into a functionary of the court. It
was only in the hearts and minds of the people that
Thoth remained what he had always been, the lord and
master of Hermopolis, and of Hermopolis alone.
</p>

<p>
The principalities of primitive Egypt gradually became
unified into two or three kingdoms, and eventually
into two kingdoms only, those of Upper and Lower
Egypt. Recent discoveries have thrown unexpected
light on this early period of history. At one time the
capital of the southern kingdom was Nekhen, called
Hierakonpolis in the Greek period, the site of which is
now represented by the ruins of Kom el-Ahmar, opposite
El-Kab. Here, among the foundations of the ancient
temple, Mr. Quibell has found remains which probably
go back to an age before that of Menes and the rise of
the united Egyptian monarchy. Among them are huge
vases of alabaster and granite, which were dedicated by
a certain king Besh in the year when he conquered the
people of Northern Egypt. On the other hand, on a
stela now at Palermo a list is given of kings who seem
to have reigned over Northern Egypt while the Pharaohs
of Nekhen were reigning in the south.<note place='foot'>See Sethe in the <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptischer Sprache</hi>, 1897, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
For how many centuries the two kingdoms existed
side by side, sometimes in peaceful intercourse, sometimes
in hostile collision, it is impossible to say. The
fact that Egypt had once been divided into two kingdoms
was never forgotten; down to the last days of the
Egyptian monarchs the Pharaoh bore the title of <q>lord
of the two lands,</q> and on his head was placed the twofold
crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. Nekhen was
under the protection not only of Horus, the god of the
Pharaonic Egyptians, but also of Nekheb, the tutelary
goddess of the whole of the southern land. From the
Cataract northward her dominion extended, but it was
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
at El-Kab opposite Nekhen, where the road from the
Red Sea and the mines of the desert reached the Nile,
that her special sanctuary stood. Besh calls himself
on his vases <q>the son of Nekheb</q>; and even as late as
the time of the Sixth Dynasty the eldest son of the
king was entitled <q>the royal son of Nekheb.</q><note place='foot'>Similarly the <q>chief <foreign rend='italic'>Kher-heb</foreign></q> of the Pharaoh, in the age of the Old
Empire, bore the title of <q>Chief of the city of Nekheb</q> (Ebers, <hi rend='italic'>Life in
Ancient Egypt</hi>, Eng. tr., p. 90). The Pyramid texts speak of the White
Crown of Southern Egypt as well as of the royal uræus <q>in the city of
Nekheb</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 167); and the goddess of the city is described as <q>the cow
Samet-urt</q> who was crowned with the two feathers (<hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 359). Elsewhere
mention is made of <q>the souls of On, Nekhen, and Pe</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 168,
182; see also <hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 272). By the <q>souls of On</q> Ra or rather Tum was
meant; Pe and Dep constituted the twin-city of the Delta called Buto
by the Greeks, over a part of which (Dep) Uazit the serpent-goddess of
the north presided, while the other half (Pe) acknowledged Horus as
its chief deity. In <hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 88 <q>the doubles in Pe</q> are said to be <q>the
double of Horus.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nekheb, the vulture, was the goddess of the south, in
contradistinction to Uazit, the serpent, the goddess of the
north. But in both the south and the north the same
dominant race held rule, the same customs prevailed, and
the same language was spoken. The Pharaonic Egyptians,
in their northern advance, had carried with them
a common legacy of ideas and manners. Their religious
conceptions had been the same, and consequently the
general form assumed by the religious cult was similar.
In spite of local differences and the self-centred character
of the numerous independent principalities, there was,
nevertheless, a family likeness between them all. Ideas
and customs, therefore, which grew up in one place
passed readily to another, and the influence of a particular
local sanctuary was easily carried beyond the limits of
the district in which it stood.
</p>

<p>
One of the most fundamental of the beliefs which the
Pharaonic Egyptians brought with them was that in the
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
divine origin of certain individuals. The prince who led
them was not only the son of a god or goddess, he was
an incarnation of the god himself. The belief is one of
the many facts which link the Pharaonic civilisation
with the culture of primitive Babylonia. In Babylonia
also the king was divine. One of the early kings of
Ur calls himself the son of a goddess, just as Besh
does at Nekhen; and the great conquerors of primeval
Asia, Sargon of Akkad and his son Naram-Sin, give
themselves the title of <q>god</q> in their inscriptions;
while Naram-Sin is even invoked during his lifetime
as <q>the god of the city of Agadê</q> or Akkad. For
many generations the Babylonian kings continued to
receive divine honours while they were still alive; and
it was not until after the conquest of Babylonia by a
tribe of half-civilised foreigners from the mountains of
Elam that the old tradition was broken, and the reigning
king ceased to be a god. Like the doctrine of the
divine right of kings in England, which could not survive
the fall of the Stuarts, the doctrine of the divine nature
of the monarch did not survive in Babylonia the fall of
the native dynasties.
</p>

<p>
In Babylonia also, as in Egypt, the king continued to
be invoked as a god after his death. Chapels and priests
were consecrated to his memory, and stated sacrifices and
offerings made to him. It was not necessary that the
deified prince should be the supreme sovereign, it was
sufficient if he were the head of a feudal principality.
Thus, while Dungi, the supreme sovereign of Babylonia,
receives in his inscriptions the title of <q>god,</q> his vassal
Gudea, the high priest and hereditary prince of the city
of Lagas, is likewise worshipped as a deity, whose cult
lasted for many centuries. Gudea was non-Semitic in
race, but most of the Babylonian kings who were thus
deified were Semites. It is therefore possible that the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
deification of the ruler was of Semitic origin, and only
adopted from them by the older Sumerian population, as
in the case of Gudea; it is also possible that it was one
of the consequences of that fusion of the two races,
Sumerian and Semitic, which produced the later population
and culture of Babylonia. However this may be,
the apotheosis of the Babylonian king during his lifetime
can be traced back as far as Sargon and Naram-Sin,
3800 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Sargon incorporated Palestine, <q>the land of
the Amorites,</q> as it was then called, into his empire,
while Naram-Sin extended his conquests to Mâgan or
the Sinaitic Peninsula, thus bringing the arms and
civilisation of Babylonia to the very doors of Egypt.
The precise nature of the connection which existed
between the Babylonian and the Egyptian belief in the
divinity of the ruler must be left to future research.
</p>

<p>
In the Egyptian mind, at all events, it was a belief
that was deeply implanted. The Pharaoh was a god
upon earth. Like the Incas of Peru, he belonged to the
solar race, and the blood which flowed in his veins was
the ichor of the gods. The existence of a similar belief
in Peru shows how easy it was for such a belief to grow
up in regard to the leader of a conquering people who
brought with them a higher culture and the arts of life.
But it presupposes religious conceptions which, though
characteristic of Babylonia, are directly contrary to those
which seem to underlie the religion of Egypt. Among
the Babylonians the gods assumed human forms; man
had been made in the likeness of the gods, and the gods
therefore were of human shape. The converse, however,
was the case in Egypt. Here the gods, with few
exceptions, were conceived of as brute beasts. Horus
was the hawk, Nekheb the vulture, Uazit of Buto the
deadly uræus snake.
</p>

<p>
There is only one way of explaining the anomaly.
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
The conception of the gods which made them men must
have come from outside, and been imposed upon a people
whose gods were the brute beasts. It must have been
the Pharaonic invaders from Asia to whom the leader
they followed was an incarnate god. Hence it was just
this leader and no other who was clothed with divinity.
Hence, too, it was that the older worship of animals was
never really harmonised with the worship of the Pharaoh.
The inner contradiction which existed between the new
religious conceptions remained to the end, in spite of all
the efforts of the priestly colleges to make them agree.
Religious art might represent the god with the head of a
beast or bird and the body of a man, the sacred books
might teach that the deity is unconfined by form, and so
could pass at will from the body of a man into that of a
beast; but all such makeshifts could not hide the actual
fact. Between the deity who is human and the deity
who is bestial no true reconciliation is possible.
</p>

<p>
We must therefore trace the deification of the Pharaoh
back to Asia, and the Asiatic element in the Egyptian
population. The Pharaonic conquerors of the valley of
the Nile were those <q>followers of Horus</q> who worshipped
their leader as a god. It was a god in human form who
had led them to victory, and Horus accordingly continued
to be represented as a man, even though the
symbolism of the hieroglyphs united with the creed of
the prehistoric races of Egypt in giving him the head of
a hawk.
</p>

<p>
At first the ruler of each of the small kingdoms into
which prehistoric Egypt was divided, was honoured as a
god, like Gudea in Babylonia. When the kingdoms
became, first, vassal principalities under a paramount
lord, and then nomes, the old tradition was still maintained.
Divine titles were given to the nomarchs even
in the later times of the united monarchy, and after their
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
death worship continued to be paid to them.<note place='foot'>Wiedemann, in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>,
iv. p. 332.</note> Christian
writers tell us how at Anabê particular individuals were
regarded as gods, to whom offerings were accordingly
brought; and Ptah, the tutelary deity of Memphis, was
pictured as a man in the wrappings of a mummy, while
to Anhur of This the human figure was assigned.
</p>

<p>
With the coalescence of the smaller principalities into
two kingdoms, the deification of the ruler was confined
within narrower bounds. But for that very reason it
became more absolute and intense. The supreme
sovereign, the Pharaoh as we may henceforth call him,
was a veritable god on earth. To his subjects he
was the source, not only of material benefits, but of
spiritual blessings as well. He was <q>the good god,</q> the
beneficent dispenser of all good things.<note place='foot'>The title of <q>good god</q> went back to a very early date, and stands
in contrast to that of <foreign rend='italic'>nefer mât-kher</foreign>, <q>good and true of voice,</q> applied to
the ordinary individual on early seal-cylinders.</note> The power of
life and death was in his hand, and rebellion against him
was rebellion against the gods. The blood that flowed
in his veins was the same as that which flowed in the
veins of the gods; it was even communicated to him
from time to time by his divine brethren; and the bas-reliefs
of a later age, when the traditional belief had
become little more than a symbolical allegory, still depict
him with his back towards the statue of the god, who is
transfusing the ichor of heaven through his veins.<note place='foot'>See the illustration from the temple of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> at Luxor, in
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 111.</note>
</p>

<p>
Menes, the king of Upper Egypt, first united under
one sceptre the two kingdoms of the Nile. The divinity
which had hitherto been shared between the Pharaohs
of Upper and Lower Egypt now passed in all it fulness
to him. He became the visible god of Egypt, just as
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
Sargon or Naram-Sin was the visible god of Akkad.
All the attributes of divinity belonged to him, as they
were conceived of by his subjects, and from him they
passed to his successors. Legitimacy of birth was
reckoned through the mother, and through the mother
accordingly the divine nature of the Pharaoh was handed
on. Only those who had been born of a princess of the
royal family could be considered to possess it in all its
purity; and where this title was wanting, it was necessary
to assume the direct intervention of a god. The mother
of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was of Asiatic origin; we read,
therefore, on the walls of the temple of Luxor, that he
was born of a virgin and the god of Thebes. Alexander,
the conqueror of Egypt, was a Macedonian; it was
needful, accordingly, that he should be acknowledged as
a son by the god of the oasis of Ammon.<note place='foot'>The Westcar Papyrus, which was written in the time of the Middle
Empire, already describes the first three kings of the Fifth Dynasty as
born of Ruddadt (the wife of a priest of the sun-god) and the god Ra of
Sakhab (Erman, <q>Die Märchen des Papyrus Westcar,</q> i. p. 55, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus den orientalischen Sammlungen zu Berlin</hi>, 1890).</note>
</p>

<p>
But such consequences of the old Egyptian belief in
the incarnation of the deity in man are leading us away
into a field of investigation which will have to be
traversed in a future lecture. For the present, it is
sufficient to keep two facts steadily before the mind:
on the one side, the old Egyptian belief in the divinity
of the brute beast; on the other, the equally old belief
in the divinity of man. The two beliefs are not really
to be harmonised one with the other; they were, in fact,
derived from different elements in the Egyptian population;
but, with his usual conservative instinct and avoidance
of abstract thought, the Egyptian of later days
co-ordinated them together, and closed his eyes to their
actual incompatibility.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture III. The Imperishable Part Of Man And The Other
World.</head>

<p>
It has sometimes been asserted by travellers and ethnologists,
that tribes exist who are absolutely without any
idea of God. It will usually be found that such assertions
mean little more than that they are without any
idea of what we mean by God: even the Zulus, who saw
in a reed the creator of the world,<note place='foot'>Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Unkulunkulu; or, the Tradition of the Creation as existing
among the Amazulu and other Tribes of South Africa</hi>, pt. i. pp. 2, 7, 8.</note> nevertheless believed
that the world had been created by a power outside
themselves. Modern research goes to show that no race
of man, so far as is known, has been without a belief in
a power of the kind, or in a world which is separate from
the visible world around us; statements to the contrary
generally rest on ignorance or misconception. The very
fact that the savage dreams, and gives to his dreams the
reality of his waking moments, brings with it a belief in
what, for the want of a better term, I will call <q>another
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
This other world, it must be remembered, is material,
as material as the <q>heavenly Jerusalem</q> to which so
many good Christians have looked forward even in our
own day. The savage has no experience of anything
else than material existence, and he cannot, therefore, rise
to the conception of what we mean by the spiritual, even
if he were capable of forming so abstract an idea. His
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
spiritual world is necessarily materialistic, not only to be
interpreted and apprehended through sensuous symbols,
but identical with those sensuous symbols themselves. The
Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>anima</foreign> meant <q>breath</q> before it meant <q>the soul.</q>
</p>

<p>
This sensuous materialistic conception of the spiritual
has lingered long in the human mind; indeed, it is
questionable whether, as long as we are human, we shall
ever shake ourselves wholly free from it. The greater
is naturally its dominance the further we recede in
history. There is <q>another world,</q> but it is a world
strangely like our own.
</p>

<p>
Closely connected with this conception of <q>another
world</q> is the conception which man forms concerning
his own nature. There are few races of mankind among
whom we do not find in one shape or another the belief
in a second self. Sometimes this second self is in all
respects a reflection and image of the living self, like the
images of those we see in our dreams; and it is more
than probable that dreams first suggested it. Sometimes
it is a mere speck of grey vapour, which may owe its
origin to the breath which issues from the mouth and
seems to forsake it at death, or to the misty forms seen
after nightfall by the savage in the gloom of the forest
and by the edge of the morass. At times it is conceived
of as a sort of luminous gas or a phosphorescent flash of
light, such as is emitted by decaying vegetation in a damp
soil. Or, again, it may be likened to the bird that flies
to heaven, to the butterfly which hovers from flower to
flower, or even to insects like the grasshopper which hop
along the ground. But however it may be envisaged, it
is at once impalpable and material, something that can
be perceived by the senses and yet eludes the grasp.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian theory of the nature of man in the
historical age of the nation was very complicated. Man
was made up of many parts, each of which was capable
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
of living eternally. The belief in his composite character
was due to the composite character of the people as
described in the last lecture, added to that conservative
tendency which prevented them from discarding or even
altering any part of the heritage of the past. Some at
least of the elements which went <q>to the making of
man</q> were derived from different elements in the population.
They had been absorbed, or rather co-ordinated,
in the State religion, with little regard to their mutual
compatibility and with little effort to reconcile them.
Hence it is somewhat difficult to distinguish them all
one from another; indeed, it is a task which no Egyptian
theologian even attempted; and when we find the list of
them given in full, it is doubtless to secure that no component
part of the individual should be omitted, the name
of which had been handed down from the generations of old.
</p>

<p>
There were, however, certain component parts which
were clearly defined, and which occupied an important
place in the religious ideas of Egypt. Foremost amongst
these was the <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> or <q>Double.</q> Underneath the conception
of the Ka lay a crude philosophy of the universe.
The Ka corresponded with the shadow in the visible
world. Like the shadow which cannot be detached from
the object, so, too, the Ka or Double is the reflection of
the object as it is conceived of in the mind. But the
Egyptian did not realise that it was only a product of the
mind. For him it was as real and material as the shadow
itself; indeed, it was much more material, for it had an
independent existence of its own. It could be separated
from the object of which it was the facsimile and presentment,
and represent it elsewhere. Nay, more than this,
it was what gave life and form to the object of which it
was the image; it constituted, in fact, its essence and
personality. Hence it was sometimes interchanged with
the <q>Name</q> which, in the eyes of the Egyptian, was the
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
essence of the thing itself, without which the thing could
not exist. In a sense the Ka was the spiritual reflection
of an object, but it was a spiritual reflection which
had a concrete form.
</p>

<p>
The <q>ideas</q> of Plato were the last development of
the Egyptian doctrine of the Ka. They were the archetypes
after which all things have been made, and they
are archetypes which are at once abstract and concrete.
Modern philosophers have transformed them into the
thoughts of God, which realise themselves in concrete
shape. But to the ancient Egyptian the concrete side
of his conception was alone apparent. That the Ka was
a creation of his own mind never once occurred to him.
It had a real and substantial existence in the world of
gods and men, even though it was not visible to the outward
senses. Everything that he knew or thought of
had its double, and he never suspected that it was his
own act of thought which brought it into being.
</p>

<p>
It was symbolism again that was to blame. Once
more the symbol was confused with that for which it
stood, and the abstract was translated into the concrete.
The abstract idea of personality became a substantial
thing, to which all the attributes of substantial objects
were attached. Like the <q>Name,</q> which was a force
with a concrete individuality of its own, the Ka was as
much an individual entity as the angels of Christian
belief.
</p>

<p>
Between it and the object or person to which it belonged,
there was the same relation as exists between the
conception and the word. The one presupposed the
other. Until the person was born, his Ka had no existence;
while, on the other hand, it was the Ka to which
his existence was owed. But once it had come into
being the Ka was immortal, like the word which, once
formed, can exist independently of the thought which gave
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
it birth. As soon as it left the body, the body ceased
to live, and did not recover life and consciousness until
it was reunited with its Ka. But while the body remained
thus lifeless and unconscious, the Ka led an
independent existence, conscious and alive.
</p>

<p>
This existence, however, was, in a sense, quite as
material as that of the body had been upon earth. The
Ka needed to be sustained by food and drink. Hence
came the offerings which were made to the dead as well
as to the gods, each of whom had his Ka, which, like the
human Ka, was dependent on the food that was supplied
to it. But it was the Ka of the food and the Ka of the
drink upon which the Ka of man or god was necessarily
fed. Though at first, therefore, the actual food and drink
were furnished by the faithful, the Egyptians were eventually
led by the force of logic to hold that models of the
food and drink in stone or terra-cotta or wood were as
efficacious as the food and drink themselves. Such
models were cheaper and more easily procurable, and
had, moreover, the advantage of being practically imperishable.
Gradually, therefore, they took the place of the
meat and bread, the beer and wine, which had once been
piled up in the dead man's tomb, and from the time of
the Eighteenth Dynasty onwards we find terra-cotta
cakes, inscribed with the name and titles of the deceased,
substituted for the funerary bread.
</p>

<p>
The same idea as that which led to the manufacture
of these sham offerings had introduced statues and
images into the tomb at an early date. In the tombs
of the Third and Fourth and following Dynasties, statues
have been found of a very high order of art. No effort
has been spared to make them speaking likenesses of the
men and women in whose tombs they were placed; even
the eyes have been made lifelike with inlaid ivory and
obsidian. Usually, too, the statues are carved out of the
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
hardest, and therefore the most enduring, of stone, so
that, when the corpse of the dead was shrivelled beyond
recognition, his counterpart in stone still represented him
just as he was in life. But the statue had its Ka like
the man it represented, and if the likeness were exact,
the Ka of the statue and the Ka of the man would be
one and the same. Hence the Ka could find a fitting
form in which to clothe itself whenever it wished to
revisit the tomb and there nourish itself on the offerings
made to the dead by the piety of his descendants. And
even if the mummy perished, the statue would remain
for the homeless Ka.<note place='foot'>Professor Maspero, to whom, along with Sir P. Le Page Renouf, we owe
the explanation of what the Egyptians meant by the Ka, first pointed
out the meaning of the portrait statues which were buried in the tomb
(<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, i. pp. 152-160).</note>
</p>

<p>
It was probably on this account that we so often find
more than one statue of the dead man in the same tomb.
The more numerous the statues, the greater chance there
was that one at least of them would survive down to the
day when the Ka should at last be again united to its
body and soul. And the priests of Heliopolis discovered
yet a further reason for the practice. From time immemorial
Ra the sun-god had been invoked there under
the form of his seven birdlike <q>souls</q> or spirits, and
double this number of Kas was now ascribed to him, each
corresponding with a quality or attribute which he could
bestow upon his worshippers.<note place='foot'>Renouf, <hi rend='italic'>TSBA.</hi> vi. p. 504 sqq.; Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler</hi>, iii. 194. 13;
Dümichen, <hi rend='italic'>Tempelinschriften</hi>, i. pl. 29.</note> Symbols already existed
in the hieroglyphics for these various qualities, so that
it was easy to regard each of them as having a separate
and concrete existence, and so being practically a Ka.
</p>

<p>
The funerary statue and the ideas connected with it
seem to have been characteristic of Memphis and the
school of theology which existed there. At all events,
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
no similar statues have been discovered at Abydos in the
tombs of the first two (Thinite) dynasties; they make
their appearance with the rise of Memphite influence
under the Third Dynasty. And with the disappearance
of the old Memphite empire, they too tend to disappear.
The disturbed condition of Egypt after the fall of the
Sixth Dynasty was not favourable to art, and it was
probably difficult to find artists any longer who could
imitate with even approximate accuracy the features of
the dead.
</p>

<p>
But under the Theban dynasties another kind of
image becomes prominent. This was the Ushebti or
<q>Respondent,</q> hundreds of which may be seen in most
museums. They are usually small figures of blue or
green porcelain, with a mattock painted under each arm,
and a basket on the back. The name and titles of the
deceased are generally inscribed upon them, and not
unfrequently the 6th chapter of the Egyptian funerary
ritual or Book of the Dead. The chapter reads as follows:
<q>O these <foreign rend='italic'>ushebtis</foreign>, whatever be the work it is
decreed the Osirified one must do in the other world,
let all hindrances to it there be smitten down for him,
even as he desires! Behold me when ye call! See
that ye work diligently every moment there, sowing the
fields, filling the canals with water, carrying sand from
the West to the East. Behold me when ye call!</q>
</p>

<p>
The chapter explained what the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>-figures were
intended for. Before the dead man, justified though he
had been by faith in Osiris and his own good deeds,
could be admitted to the full enjoyment of the fields of
paradise, it was necessary that he should show that he
was worthy of them by the performance of some work.
He was therefore called upon to cultivate that portion
of them which had been allotted to him, to till the
ground and water it from the heavenly Nile. Had he
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
been a peasant while on earth, the task would have been
an easy one; had he, on the contrary, belonged to the
wealthier classes, or been unaccustomed to agricultural
labour, it would have been hard and irksome. Thanks
to the doctrine of the Ka, however, means were found
for lightening the obligation. The relatives of the dead
buried with him a number of <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>-figures, each of
which represented a fellah with mattock and basket, and
their Kas, it was believed, would, with the help of the
sacred words of the Ritual, assist him in his work.
Sometimes, to make assurance doubly sure, the images
were broken; thus, as it were, putting an end to their
earthly existence, and setting their Kas free.
</p>

<p>
When once the tomb was closed and the mummy
hidden away in the recesses, it was necessary to find a
way by which the Ka could enter the abode of the dead,
and so eat and drink the food that had been deposited
there. For it must be remembered that the Ka from
its very nature was subject to the same limitations as
the person whom it represented. If there was no door
it could not enter. Where it differed from the living
person was in its existing in a world in which what are
shams and pictures to us were so many concrete realities.
Consequently all that was needed in order to allow the
Ka free entrance into the tomb was to paint a false
door on one of its walls; the Ka could then pass in and
out through the Ka of the door, and so rejoin its mummy
or its statue when so it wished.
</p>

<p>
This false door, in front of which the offerings to the
dead were originally laid, must go back to a primitive
period in Egyptian history. Professor Flinders Petrie
has shown that it is presupposed by the so-called Banner
name of the Egyptian Pharaohs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Season in Egypt</hi>, 1887, pp. 21, 22.</note> Ever since the first
days of hieroglyphic decipherment, it has been known
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
that besides the name or names given to the Pharaoh at
birth, and commonly borne by him in life, he had
another name not enclosed in a cartouche, but in something
that resembled a banner, and was surmounted by
the hawk of the god Horus. It actually represented,
however, not a banner, but the panel above the false
door of a tomb, and the name written within it was the
name of the Ka of the Pharaoh rather than of the
Pharaoh himself. It was accordingly the name by which
he was known after death, the name inscribed on the
objects buried in his tomb, and also the name under
which he was worshipped whether in this life or in the
next. As the Horus or deified leader who had subjugated
the older inhabitants of Egypt and founded the
Pharaonic dynasties, it was right and fitting that he
should be known by the name of his Ka. It was not
so much the Pharaoh that was adored by his subjects,
as the Ka of the Pharaoh, and the Pharaoh was god
because the blood of Horus flowed in his veins.
</p>

<p>
The earliest monuments of the Pharaohs yet discovered
give almost invariably only the Ka-name of the
king. The fact is doubtless due in great measure to
their general character. With few exceptions they consist
of tombstones and other sepulchral furniture. But
the objects found in the foundations of the temple of
Nekhen are also examples of the same fact. The fusion
was not yet complete, at all events in the south, between
the Pharaoh as man and the Pharaoh as god; it was
his Ka that was divine, rather than the bodily husk in
which it sojourned for a time.
</p>

<p>
The Ka accordingly occupies a prominent place in the
names of the Pharaohs of the Old Empire, while the
sacred art of the temples continued the ancient tradition
down to the latest times. Horus and the Nile-gods, for
instance, present the Ka of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> along with
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
the infant prince to the god of Thebes; and at Soleb the
same Pharaoh is represented as making offerings to his
own double.<note place='foot'>Cf. the illustrations in Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 259; and
Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler</hi>, iii. 87. In Bonomi and Arundale, <hi rend='italic'>Gallery of
Antiquities</hi>, pt. i. pi. 31, is a picture of Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> with his Ka
standing behind him.</note> Indeed, it is not unfrequent to find the
king and his Ka thus separated from one another and
set side by side; and at times the Ka becomes a mere
symbol, planted like a standard at the monarch's back.
</p>

<p>
It was the Ka, therefore, which in the early days of
Egyptian religious thought was more especially associated
with the divine nature of the king. The association of
ideas was assisted by the fact that the gods, like men,
had each his individual Ka. And in the older period of
Egyptian history the Ka of the god and not the god
himself was primarily the object of worship. The sacred
name of Memphis was Ḥa-ka-Ptaḥ, <q>the temple of
the Ka of Ptaḥ,</q> which appears as <foreign rend='italic'>Khikuptakh</foreign> in the
Tel el-Amarna letters, and from which the Greeks
derived their <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Aiguptos</foreign>, <q>Egypt.</q> Even in the last
centuries of Egyptian independence the prayers addressed
to the bull-god Apis are still made for the
most part to his Ka.
</p>

<p>
The Ka, in fact, was conceived of as the living principle
which inspired both gods and men. Its separation from
the body meant what we call death, and life could return
only when the two were reunited. That reunion could
take place only in the other world, after long years had
passed and strange experiences had been undergone by
the disembodied Ka. The 105th chapter of the Book of
the Dead contains the words with which on the day of
resurrection the Ka was to be greeted. <q>Hail,</q> says
the dead man, <q>to thee who wast my Ka during life!
Behold, I come unto thee, I arise resplendent, I labour, I
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
am strong, I am hale, I bring grains of incense, I am
purified thereby, and I thereby purify that which goeth
forth from thee.</q> Then follow the magical words by
which all evil was to be warded off: <q>I am that amulet
of green felspar, the necklace of the god Ra, which is
given unto them that are on the horizon. They flourish,
I flourish, my Ka flourishes even as they, my duration of
life flourishes even as they, my Ka has abundance of
food even as they. The scale of the balance rises, Truth
rises high unto the nose of the god Ra on the day on
which my Ka is where I am (?). My head and my arm
are restored to me where I am (?). I am he whose eye
seeth, whose ears hear; I am not a beast of sacrifice.
The sacrificial formulæ for the higher ones of heaven are
recited where I am.</q>
</p>

<p>
As might be expected, the Ka is often represented
with the symbol of life in its hands. At the same time,
it is important to remember that, though under one
aspect the Ka was identical with the principle of life, in
the mind of the Egyptian it was separate from the
latter, just as it was separate from consciousness and
from the divine essence. These were each of them
independent entities which were possessed by the Ka
just as they were possessed by its human counterpart.
Life, consciousness, and relationship to the gods were all
attributes of the Ka, but they were attributes, each of
which had a concrete and independent existence of its own.
</p>

<p>
At the outset, doubtless, the Ka was practically
identical with the vital principle. Primitive man does
not distinguish as we do between the animate and the
inanimate. He projects his own personality into the
things he sees about him, and ascribes to them the same
motive forces as those which move himself. He knows
of only one source of movement and activity, and that
source is life. The stars which travel through the
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
firmament, the arrow that flies through the air, are either
alive or else are directed and animated by some living
power. Movement, in fact, implies life, and the moving
object, whatever it may be, is a living thing.
</p>

<p>
The old belief or instinct is still strong in the child.
He revenges himself upon the ball or stone that has
struck him as though it too were a living being. In the
Mosaic law it is laid down that <q>if an ox gore a man or
a woman that they die, then the ox shall be surely
stoned</q>; and similar penalties were enforced against
animals which had injured man, not only in the Middle
Ages, but even in the eighteenth century. Thus a pig
was burned at Fontenay-aux-Roses, in 1266, for having
devoured a child; and in 1389 a horse was brought to
trial at Dijon for the murder of a man, and condemned
to death. In Brazil, in 1713, an action was brought
against the ants who had burrowed under the foundations
of a monastery, and, after counsel had been heard on
both sides, they were solemnly condemned to banishment
by the judge; while, in 1685, the bell of the
Protestant chapel at La Rochelle was first scourged for
having abetted heresy, then catechised and made to
recant, and finally baptized.<note place='foot'>Baring Could, <hi rend='italic'>Curiosities of Olden Times</hi>, 2nd ed., p. 57 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The early Egyptians were not more enlightened than
the orthodox theologians of La Rochelle. For them, too,
action must have implied life, and the distinction between
object and subject had not yet been realised. Hence the
belief that objects as well as persons had each its Ka, a
belief which was strengthened by the fact that they all
alike cast shadows before them, as well as the further
belief that the nature of the Ka was in either case the
same. Hence it was, moreover, that the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>-figures
and other sepulchral furniture were broken in order that
their Kas might be released from them, and so accompany
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
the Ka of the dead man in his wanderings in the other
world. As life and the power of movement deserted the
corpse of the dead man as soon as his Ka was separated
from it, so too the Ka of the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign> passed out of it
when its form was mutilated by breakage. The life that
was in it had departed, as it were, into another world.
</p>

<p>
It is even possible that the very word <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> had originally
a connection with a root signifying <q>to live.</q> At
any rate, it was identical in spelling with a word which
denoted <q>food</q>; and that the pronunciation of the two
words was the same, may be gathered from the fact that
the Egyptian bas-reliefs sometimes represent the offerings
of food made to the dead or to the gods inside the arms
of the symbol of the Ka<note place='foot'>It is noticeable that while the Tel el-Amarna letters show that the
actual pronunciation of the word Ka was Ku, <foreign rend='italic'>Ha-ka-Ptah</foreign>, the sacred
name of Memphis, being written <foreign rend='italic'>Khi-ku-Ptakh</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>Aiguptos</foreign>), <foreign rend='italic'>ku</foreign> was
<q>food</q> in the Sumerian of primitive Babylonia.</note>. When we remember that
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vivande</foreign> is nothing more than the Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vivenda</foreign>, <q>the
things on which we live,</q> there arises at least the possibility
of an etymological connection between the double
and the principle of life which it once symbolised.<note place='foot'>In his <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, i. p. 61,
Professor Maspero gives <q>cake</q> as the original sense of <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign>, which, however,
he explains as <q>a cake of earth,</q> and hence <q>substance.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Now, in my Hibbert Lectures on the <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Babylonians</hi>, I pointed out that the early
Sumerian inhabitants of Babylonia held a belief which is
almost precisely the same as that of the Egyptians in
regard to the Ka. In Babylonia also, everything had its
Zi or <q>double,</q> and the nature of this Zi is in no way
distinguishable from that of the Egyptian Ka. As in
Egypt, moreover, the gods had each his Zi as well as
men and things, and, as in Egypt, it was the Zi of the
god rather than the god himself which was primarily
worshipped. So marked is the resemblance between the
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
two conceptions, that in working it out on the Babylonian
side, I could not resist the conviction that there must
have been some connection between them. That was sixteen
years ago. Since then discoveries have been
made and facts brought to light which indicate that a
connection really did exist between the Babylonia and
the Egypt of the so-called prehistoric age, and have led
me to believe, with Hommel, de Morgan, and others,
that Babylonia was the home and cradle of the Pharaonic
Egyptians. In Sumerian the word Zi signified <q>life,</q>
and was denoted by the picture of a flowering reed. It
was the life on which was imprinted the form of the
body that was for a time its home, and its separation
from the body meant the death of the latter. The
Sumerians never advanced to the further stage of making
the vital principle itself a separable quality; perhaps the
original signification of the word which it never lost
would have prevented this. But they did go on to
transform the Zi into a spirit or demon, who, in place of
being the counterpart of some individual person or
thing, could enter at will into any object he chose.
Even in Egypt, traces of the same logical progress in
ideas may perhaps be found. If Professor Maspero is
right in his interpretation of certain passages in the
Pyramid texts and Ptolemaic papyri, <q>The double did
not allow its family to forget it, but used all the means
at its disposal to remind them of its existence. It
entered their houses and their bodies, terrified them,
waking and sleeping, by its sudden apparitions, struck
them down with disease or madness, and would even
suck their blood like the modern vampire<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 114. The Ka, however, is here identified
with the Khu, and it is questionable whether the passages referred to
in the Pyramid texts really embody old ideas which are to be interpreted
literally, or whether they are not rather to be taken metaphorically.</note>.</q> Such a
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
conception of the Ka, however, if ever it existed, must
have soon passed away, leaving behind it but few vestiges
of itself.
</p>

<p>
I have dwelt thus long on the doctrine of the Ka or
double on account both of its importance and of the
difficulties it presents to the modern scholar. Its discovery
by Professor Maspero and Sir P. Le Page Renouf
cleared away a host of misconceptions, and introduced
light into one of the darkest corners of Egyptian religion<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Comptes rendus du Congrés provincial des Orientalistes à
Lyon</hi>, 1878, pp. 235-263; Renouf, <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Society of Biblical
Archæology</hi> (1879), vi. pp. 494-508.</note>.
And however strange it may seem to us, it was in
thorough accordance with the simple logic of primitive
man. Given the premisses, the conclusion followed. It
was only when the Egyptian came to progress in knowledge
and culture, and new ideas about his own nature
were adopted, that difficulties began to multiply and the
theory of the Ka to become complicated.
</p>

<p>
Among these new ideas was that of the Khu or
<q>luminous</q> part of man. On the recently discovered
monuments of the early period, the Khu holds a place
which it lost after the rise of Memphite influence with
the Third Dynasty. We find it depicted on the tombstones
of Abydos embraced by the down-bent arms of
the Ka. The Khu, therefore, was conceived of as comprehended
in the human Ka, as forming part of it,
though at the same time as a separate entity. It was,
in fact, the soul of the human Ka, and was accordingly
symbolised by the crested ibis<note place='foot'>This particular bird was chosen because its name was similar in sound
to that of the Khu. For the same reason the plover (<foreign rend='italic'>ba</foreign>) denoted the Ba
or soul. On objects found by de Morgan in the tomb of Menes at Negada,
the <q>soul</q> is represented by an ostrich.</note>. It may be that it was
in the beginning nothing more than the phosphorescent
light emitted by decaying vegetation which the belated
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
wayfarer took for a ghost; the <foreign rend='italic'>ginn</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>jinn</foreign>) of the
modern Egyptian fellah are similar lights which flash up
suddenly from the ground. But the earliest examples of
its use on the monuments are against such an ignoble
origin, and suggest rather that it was the glorified spirit
which mounted up like a bird in the arms of its Ka
towards the brilliant vault of heaven. It is not until
we come to the decadent days of the Greek and Roman
periods that the Khu appears in a degraded form as a
malignant ghost which enters the bodies of the living in
order to torment them. No traces of such a belief are
to be found in older days. The Pyramid texts speak of
<q>the four Khu of Horus,</q> <q>who live in Heliopolis,</q> and
were at once male and female, and of the Khu who
brandish their arms and form a sort of bodyguard
around the god of the dead. They are identified with
the fixed stars, and more especially with those of the
Great Bear, and in the euhemeristic chronicles of Egyptian
history they become the <q>Manes</q> of Manetho, the semi-divine
dynasty which intervened between the dynasties
of the gods and of men.<note place='foot'>See Chassinat, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil</hi>, xix. p. 23 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Khu thus forms a link between men and the gods,
and participates in the divine nature. It is the soul
regarded as a godlike essence, as coming down from
heaven rather than as mounting up towards it. It is
not only disembodied, but needs the body no longer; it
belongs to the Ka, which still lives and moves, and not
to the mummified corpse from which the vital spark has
fled. It waits on the god of the dead, not on the dead
themselves.
</p>

<p>
It seems probable, therefore, that in the part of Egypt
in which the doctrine of the Khu grew up, mummification
was not practised; and the probability is strengthened by
the fact that, before the rise of the Third Dynasty,
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
embalming was apparently not frequent in Upper Egypt,
even in the case of the kings. But, however this may
be, one thing is certain. The conception of the Khu
cannot have originated in the same part of the country,
or perhaps among the same element in the population,
as a parallel but wholly inconsistent conception which
eventually gained the predominance. According to this
conception, the imperishable part of man which, like the
Ka, passed after death into the other world, was the Ba
or <q>soul.</q> Like the Khu, the Ba was pictured as a bird;
but the bird is usually given a human head and sometimes
human hands.<note place='foot'>From the fifteenth to the eleventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, it was fashionable to
substitute for the bird a beetle with a ram's head, the phonetic value of
the hieroglyph of ram being <foreign rend='italic'>ba</foreign>, and that of the beetle <foreign rend='italic'>kheper</foreign>, <q>to
become.</q></note> But, while the Khu was essentially
divine, the Ba was essentially human. It is true that
the Ba, as well as the Khu, was assigned to the gods&mdash;Ra
of Heliopolis was even credited with seven; but
whereas man possessed a Khu or luminous soul because
he was likened to the gods, the gods possessed a Ba
because they were likened to men.
</p>

<p>
The relation between the two is brought out very
clearly in the philosophy of the so-called Hermetic
books, which endeavoured to translate the theology of
Egypt into Greek thought. There we are told that the
Khu is the intelligence (νοῦς), of which the Ba or soul
(ψυχή) is as it were the envelope. As long as the soul
is imprisoned in the earthly tabernacle of the body, the
intelligence is deprived of the robe of fire in which
it should be clothed, its brightness is dimmed, and its
purity is sullied. The death of the body releases it from
its prison-house; it once more soars to heaven and
becomes a spirit (δαίμων), while the soul is carried to
the hall of judgment, there to be awarded punishment
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
or happiness in accordance with its deserts.<note place='foot'>Hermes Trismeg., <hi rend='italic'>Pœmandres</hi>, ed. Parthey, chs. i. and x.</note> The Khu,
in other words, is a spark of that divine intelligence
which pervades the world and to which it must return;
the Ba is the individual soul which has to answer after
death for the deeds committed in the body.
</p>

<p>
The plover was the bird usually chosen to represent
the Ba, but at times the place of the plover is taken by
the hawk, the symbol of Horus and the solar gods.
That the soul should have been likened to a bird is
natural, and we meet with the same or similar symbolism
among other peoples. Like the bird, it flew between
earth and heaven, untrammelled by the body to which
it had once been joined. From time to time it visited
its mummy; at other times it dwelt with the gods
above. Now and again, so the inscriptions tell us, it
alighted on the boughs of the garden it had made for
itself in life, cooling itself under the sycamores and eating
their fruits. For the Ba was no more immaterial
than the Ka; it, too, needed meat and drink for its sustenance,
and looked to its relatives and descendants to
furnish them.
</p>

<p>
But, as Professor Maspero<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 166.</note> has pointed out, there was
a very real and fundamental difference between the idea
of the Ka or double, and that of the Ba or soul. The
Ka was originally nourished on the actual offerings that
were placed in the tomb of the dead man; it passed
into it through the false door and consumed the food
that it found there. But the soul had ascended to the
gods in heaven; it lived in the light of day, not in the
darkness of the tomb; and it is doubtful if it was ever
supposed to return there. To the gods accordingly was
committed the care of the Ba, and of seeing that it was
properly provided for. By the power of prayer and
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
magical incantation, the various articles of food, or, more
strictly speaking, their doubles, were identified with the
gods, and communicated by the gods to the soul. Long
before the days when the Pyramid texts had been compiled,
this theory of the nourishment of the soul was
applied also to the nourishment of the Ka, and the older
belief in the material eating and drinking of the Ka had
passed away. All that remained of it was the habitual
offering of the food to the dead, a custom which still
lingers among the fellahin of Egypt, both Moslem and
Copt.
</p>

<p>
Besides the double and the two souls, there was yet
another immortal element in the human frame. This
was the heart, the seat both of the feelings and of the
mind. But it was not the material heart, but its
immaterial double, which passed after death into the
other world. The material heart was carefully removed
from the mummy, and with the rest of the intestines
was usually cast into the Nile. Porphyry<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Abst.</hi> iv. 10.</note> tells us that
in his time, when the bodies of the wealthier classes
were embalmed, the Egyptians <q>take out the stomach
and put it into a coffer, and, holding the coffer to the
sun, protest, one of the embalmers making a speech on
behalf of the dead. This speech, which Euphantos
translated from his native language, is as follows: <q>O
Lord the Sun, and all ye gods who give life to man,
receive me and make me a companion of the eternal
gods. For the gods, whom my parents made known to
me, as long as I have lived in this world I have continued
to reverence, and those who gave birth to my
body I have ever honoured. And as for other men, I
have neither slain any, nor defrauded any of anything
entrusted to me, nor committed any other wicked act;
but if by chance I have committed any sin in my life,
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
by either eating or drinking what was forbidden, not of
myself did I sin, but owing to these members,</q>&mdash;at the
same time showing the coffer in which the stomach was.
And having said this, he throws it into the river, and
embalms the rest of the body as being pure. Thus they
thought that they needed to excuse themselves to God
for what they had eaten and drunken, and therefore so
reproach the stomach.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. also Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De Esu carnium Or.</hi> ii. p. 996, and <hi rend='italic'>Sept. Sapient.
Conviv.</hi> p. 159 B.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now and then, however, the heart and intestines
were replaced in the mummy, but under the protection
of wax images of the four genii of the dead&mdash;the four
Khu of the Book of the Dead. More often they were
put into four vases of alabaster or some other material,
which were buried with the dead.<note place='foot'>The four vases were dedicated to the man-headed Amset (or Smet), the
jackal-headed Dua-mut-ef, the ape-headed Hâpi, and the hawk-headed
Qebḥ-sonu-f, who are identified with the planets in the Pyramid texts
(Maspero, <q>Pyramide du roi Ounas</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, iii. p. 205).</note> Though the latter
practice was not very common, probably on account of
its expense, it must go back to the very beginnings of
Egyptian history. The hieroglyphic symbol of the heart
is just one of these vases, and one of the two names
applied to the heart was <foreign rend='italic'>ḥati</foreign>, <q>that which belongs to
the vase.</q> After ages even endeavoured to draw a
distinction between <foreign rend='italic'>ab</foreign> <q>the heart</q> proper, and <foreign rend='italic'>ḥati</foreign> <q>the
heart-sack.</q><note place='foot'>See the Book of the Dead, chs. xxvi. and sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
From the time of the Twelfth Dynasty<note place='foot'>It is still a moot question whether any scarabs go back to the age of
the Old Empire. Personally, I am inclined to agree with Prof. Flinders
Petrie in thinking that they do so.</note> onwards, the
place of the material heart in the mummy was taken
by an amulet, through the influence of which, it was
supposed, the corpse would be secured against all the
dangers and inconveniences attending the loss of its
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
heart until the day of resurrection. The amulet was in
the form of a beetle or scarab, the emblem of <q>becoming</q>
or transformation, and on the under side of it there was
often inscribed the 30th chapter of the Book of the
Dead, to the words of which were ascribed a magical
effect. The chapter reads as follows: <q>O heart (<foreign rend='italic'>ab</foreign>) of
my mother, O heart (<foreign rend='italic'>ḥati</foreign>) of my transformations! Let
there be no stoppage to me as regards evidence (before
the judges of the dead), no hindrance to me on the part
of the Powers, no repulse of me in the presence of the
guardian of the scales! Thou art my Ka in my body,
the god Khnum who makes strong my limbs. Come
thou to the good place to which we are going. Let not
our name be overthrown by the lords of Hades who
cause men to stand upright! Good unto us, yea good is
it to hear that the heart is large (and heavy) when the
words (of life) are weighed!<note place='foot'>Or, according to Renouf's translation: <q>Pleasant unto us, pleasant
unto the listener, is the joy of the weighing of the words.</q></note> Let no lies be uttered
against me before God. How great art thou!</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the immaterial heart, the <q>Ka</q> of it,
which is addressed in the words just quoted, had made
its way through the region of the other world, until it
finally reached the place known as <q>the Abode of
Hearts.</q> Here in the judgment-hall of Osiris it met the
dead man to whom it had formerly belonged, and here,
too, it accused him of all the evil words and thoughts he
had harboured in his lifetime, or testified to the good
thoughts and words of which he had been the author.
For the heart, though the organ through which his
thoughts and words had acted, was not the cause of
them; in its nature it was essentially pure and divine,
and it had been an unwilling witness of the sins it had
been forced to know. Eventually it was weighed in the
balance against the image of Truth, and only if the
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
scales turned in favour of the dead man could it rejoin
its former body and live with it for ever in the islands
of the Blest.
</p>

<p>
The scales and judgment-hall, however, belong to the
religious conceptions which gathered round the name of
Osiris, like the Paradise which the risen mummy looked
forward to enjoy. It was only after the worship of
Osiris had become universal throughout Egypt, and the
older or local ideas of the future life had been accommodated
to them, that it was possible for an Egyptian
to speak of meeting his disembodied heart, or of the
testimony it could give for or against him before the
judges of the dead. The fact that the use of the scarab
does not seem to extend further back than the age of
the Memphite or Theban dynasties, may imply that it
was only then that the Osirian beliefs were officially
fitted on to earlier forms of faith. However this may
be, the worship of Osiris and the beliefs attaching to
it must be left to another lecture, and for the present
we must pass on to the mummy itself, the last part of
man which it was hoped would be immortal.
</p>

<p>
The mummy or Sâḥu has to be carefully distinguished
from the Khat or natural body. The latter was a mere
dead shell, seen by the soul but not affording a resting-place
for it. The mummy, on the other hand, contained
within itself the seeds of growth and resurrection. It
could be visited by the soul and inspired by it for a few
moments with life, and the Egyptian looked forward to
a time when it would once more be reunited with both
its heart and its soul, and so rise again from the dead.
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to say how far back in the history of
the Egyptian religion this belief in the immortality of
the mummy may go. It can hardly have originated in
the same circle of ideas as the doctrine of the Ka,
though the doctrine of the Ka could easily be reconciled
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
with it. On the one hand, it seems connected, as we
shall see, with the cult of Osiris; but, on the other hand,
there are no traces of mummification in the prehistoric
graves, and it is doubtful whether there are any in the
royal tombs of Negada and Abydos which belong to the
age of the First and Second Dynasties. At all events,
the scarab, which accompanied embalmment, first appears
at a much later date, and perhaps had a Memphite origin.
There are, however, indications that the process of
embalming first arose among the pre-Menic rulers of
Nekhen, in the neighbourhood of El-Kab. The soil of
El-Kab literally effloresces with the natron, which, it
was discovered, preserved the bodies buried in it; and
even as late as the time of the Pyramid texts of the
Fifth and Sixth Dynasties, when the northern sources
of natron were known, it was still necessary for ceremonial
purposes that the materials used by the embalmer
should contain some of the natron of El-Kab.<note place='foot'>Three grains of the natron of the city of Nekheb had to be used,
while only two grains of that of the north were required (Maspero,
<q>Pyramide du roi Ounas</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, iii. p. 182). The
Horus of Nekhen, opposite El-Kab, was represented by a mummified
hawk (<foreign rend='italic'>akhem</foreign>).</note>
</p>

<p>
What was difficult to harmonise with the belief in the
resurrection of the mummy was the belief which made
the risen man an <q>Osiris,</q> identified, that is to say, in
substance with the god Osiris, and not his old material
self. In the days, therefore, when Greek philosophy
took it in hand to systematise and interpret the theology
of Egypt, the risen mummy drops out of sight. The
Khu, as we have seen, becomes the divine intelligence,
which for a time is enshrouded in the human soul; and
this again needs the envelope of the spirit, which sends
the breath of life through the veins before it can tabernacle
in the body of man. The Hermetic books tell us
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
that while body, spirit, and soul are common to man and
the beasts, the divine intelligence is his alone to possess,
stripped, indeed, of its native covering of ethereal fire,
but still the veritable spirit of God. Ever is it seeking
to raise the human soul to itself, and so purify it from
the passions and desires with which it is inspired by the
body. But the flesh wages continual war against it, and
endeavours to drag the soul down to its own level. If
the soul yields, after death the intelligence returns to its
original state, while the soul is arraigned before the
judgment-seat of heaven, and there being accused by its
conscience, the heart, is condemned to the punishment
of the lost. First it is scourged for its sins, and then
handed over to the buffetings of the tempests, suspended
between earth and sky. At times in the form of an
evil demon it seeks alleviation of its torments by entering
the body of a man or animal, whom it drives to
murder and madness. But at last, after ages of suffering,
the end comes; it dies the second death, and is
annihilated for ever.
</p>

<p>
The good soul, on the other hand, which has listened
in life to the voice of the divine intelligence, and
struggled to overcome the lusts and passions of the
flesh, obtains after death its reward. Guided by the
intelligence, it traverses space, learning the secrets of the
universe, and coming to understand the things that are
dark and mysterious to us here. At length its education
in the other world is completed, and it is permitted
to see God face to face and to lose itself in His ineffable
glory.
</p>

<p>
I need not point out to you how deeply this Hellenised
philosophy of Egypt has affected the religious thought
of Christian Alexandria, and through Alexandria of
Christian Europe. It may be that traces of it may be
detected even in the New Testament. At any rate,
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
much of the psychology of Christian theologians is
clearly derived from it. We are still under the influence
of ideas whose first home was in Egypt, and whose
development has been the work of long ages of time.
True or false, they are part of the heritage bequeathed
to us by the past.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture IV. The Sun-God And The Ennead.</head>

<p>
In my last lecture, when speaking of the form under
which the soul of man was pictured by the Egyptians, I
mentioned that it was often represented by a hawk, the
symbol of the sun-god. Why the hawk should have
thus symbolised the sun is a question that has often
been asked. The Egyptians did not know themselves;
and Porphyry, in the dying days of the old Egyptian
faith, gravely declares that it was because the hawk was
a compound of blood and breath! One explanation has
been that it was because the hawk pounces down from
the sky like the rays of the sun, which, like the eagle,
he can gaze at without blinking; and a passage in the
<hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> of Homer (xv. 525) has been invoked in favour
of this view, where the hawk is called <q>the swift
messenger of Apollo.</q> But if there is any connection
between the Homeric passage and the Egyptian symbol,
it would show only that the symbol had been borrowed
by the Greek poet. Originally, moreover, it was only
the sun-god of Upper Egypt who was represented even
by the Egyptians under the form of a hawk.
</p>

<p>
This was Horus, often called in the later texts <q>Horus
the elder</q> (Hor-ur, the Greek Aroêris), in order to
distinguish him from a wholly different god, Horus the
younger, the son of Isis. His symbol, the hawk, is found
on the early Pharaonic monuments which recent excavations
have brought to light. Sometimes the hawk stands
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
on the so-called standard, which is really a perch, sometimes
on the crenelated circle, which denoted a city in
those primitive days. The standard is borne before the
Pharaoh, representing at once his own title and the nome
or principality over which he held rule; and its resemblance
to the stone birds perched on similar supports, which Mr.
Bent found in the ruins of Zimbabwe, suggests a connection
between the prehistoric gold miners of Central Africa
and the early inhabitants of Southern Egypt. On one
of the early Egyptian monuments discovered at Abydos,
two hawks stand above the wall of a city which seems
to bear the name of <q>the city of the kings,</q><note place='foot'>De Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, ii. pl. iii. line 2.</note> and a slate
plaque found by Mr. Quibell at Kom el-Aḥmar shows us
on one side the Pharaoh of Nekhen inspecting the
decapitated bodies of his enemies with two hawks on
standards carried before him, while, on the other side, a
hawk leads the bridled <q>North</q> to him under the guise
of a prisoner, through whose lips a ring has been passed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache</hi>, xxxvi. pls. xii. and xiii.; Quibell,
<hi rend='italic'>Hierakonpolis</hi>, pt. i. pl. xxix.</note>
In the first case, the hawks may represent the districts
of which the god they symbolised was the protecting
deity;<note place='foot'>Professor Maspero, however, proposes to see in them a symbol of the
king of Upper Egypt destroying a hostile city.</note> in the second case, the god and the king must
be identified together. It was as Horus, the hawk, that
the Pharaoh had conquered the Egyptians of the north,
and it was Horus, therefore, who had given them into his
hand.
</p>

<p>
If Dr. Naville is right, Horus the hawk-god is again
represented on the same plaque, with the symbol of
<q>follower,</q> above a boat which is engraved over the
bodies of the decapitated slain.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xxi. pp. 116, 117. Dr. Naville points out that
on the Palermo Stela the festival of the Shesh-Hor, with the determinative
of a sacred bark, occurs repeatedly in that part of the inscription which
relates to the festivals of the kings of the first two dynasties. Professor
Petrie has found the same festival mentioned on two ivory tablets from
the tomb of a king of the First Dynasty at Abydos (Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>The Royal
Tombs of the First Dynasty</hi>, pt, i. pl. xvii.); and it may be added that in
the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 670; <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, viii. p. 105) the Mât
or Mâdit bark of the sun-god is identified with the bark of the Shesh-Hor,
while the Semkett or bark in which the sun-god voyages at night becomes
a bark in which the place of the hawk is taken by a picture of the
ben or tomb of Osiris&mdash;here identified with that of Akhem the mummified
hawk, which forms part of the symbol for the Thinite nome. Elsewhere
it is the Semkett or day-bark of the sun which is identified with the
festival of the Shesh-Hor (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, iii. p. 205).</note> Countenance is given
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
to this view by a drawing on the rocks near El-Kab, in
which the cartouches of two kings of the Fourth Dynasty,
Sharu and Khufu, are carried in boats on the prows of
which a hawk is perched, while above each name are two
other hawks, standing on the hieroglyph of <q>gold,</q> and
with the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt on their
heads. The title <q>follower of Horus</q> would take us
back to the earliest traditions of Egyptian history. The
<q>followers of Horus,</q> according to the later texts, were
the predecessors of Menes and the First Dynasty of united
Egypt, the Pharaohs and princes of the southern kingdom
whose very names were forgotten in after days. Nevertheless,
it was remembered that they had founded the
great sanctuaries of the country; thus an inscription at
Dendera declares that in the reign of king Pepi of the
Sixth Dynasty there was found in the wall of the palace
a parchment on which was a plan of the temple drawn
upon it in the time of <q>the followers of Horus.</q> The
legends of Edfu told how these followers of Horus had
been smiths, armed with weapons of iron, and how they
had driven the enemies of their leader before them until
they had possessed themselves of the whole of Egypt.<note place='foot'>On the <foreign rend='italic'>mesnitiu</foreign> or <q>blacksmiths</q> of Horus, see Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 313 and sqq. The <foreign rend='italic'>Mesnit</foreign> or <q>Forge</q> was the name
given to the passage opening into the shrine of the temple of Edfu.</note>
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
But many hard-fought battles were needed before this
could be accomplished. Again and again had the foe
been crushed&mdash;at Zadmit near Thebes, at Neter-Khadu
near Dendera, at Minia, at Behnesa and Ahnas on the
frontier of the Fayyûm, and finally at Zaru on the Asiatic
borders of the Delta. Even here, however, the struggle
was not over. Horus and his followers had to take ship
and pursue the enemy down the Red Sea, inflicting a
final blow upon them near Berenicê, from whence he
returned across the desert in triumph to Edfu.
</p>

<p>
In this legend, which in its present form is not older
than the Ptolemaic period, echoes of the gradual conquest
of Egypt by the first followers of the Pharaohs have
probably been preserved, though they have been combined
with a wholly different cycle of myths relating to the
eternal struggle between Horus the son of Isis and his
twin brother Set. But the confusion between the two
Horuses must have arisen at an early time. Already a
king of the Third Dynasty, whose remains have been
found in the ruins of Nekhen, and who bore the title of
him <q>who is glorified with the two sceptres, in whom
the two Horus gods are united,</q> has above his name the
crowned emblems of Horus and Set.<note place='foot'>Quibell, <hi rend='italic'>Hierakonpolis</hi>, pt. i. pl. ii.</note> The titles of the
queens of the Memphite dynasties make it clear that by
the two Horuses are meant the two kingdoms of Upper
and Lower Egypt, and we must therefore see in Horus
and Set the symbols of the South and North.<note place='foot'>See de Rougé, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Monuments qu'on peut attribuer aux
six premières dynasties</hi>, pp. 44, 45.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the rock drawing, south of El-Kab, to which I have
alluded a few minutes ago, the two Horus hawks stand
on the symbol of <q>gold,</q> the one wearing the crown of
Southern Egypt, the other that of the North. The
<q>Golden Horus</q> was, in fact, one of the titles assumed
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
by the Pharaoh at an early date. Whether the epithet
applied to the god represented originally the golden
colour of the wings of the sparrow-hawk, or whether, as
is more probable, it denoted the Horus-hawk of gold who
watched over the destinies of the kings of Upper Egypt
in their ancient capital of Nekhen, it is now impossible
to say.<note place='foot'>Mr. Quibell found a large bronze hawk with a head of solid gold and
eyes of obsidian along with two bronze figures of Pepi, in the foundation
of the temple of Nekhen (Kom el-Aḥmar); see Quibell, <hi rend='italic'>Hierakonpolis</hi>,
pt. i. pl. xlii. Hor-nubi, <q>the golden Horus,</q> was the god of the
Antæopolite nome.</note> Later ages explained it as referring to the
golden rays of the morning sun.
</p>

<p>
In the time of the Fourth Dynasty the title was
attached indifferently to the Ka or death name given to
the Pharaoh after his death, and to the living name given
to him at his birth into this world. The Horus-hawk,
without the symbol of <q>gold,</q> surmounted, so far as we
know, only the Ka name. It was the double of the
Pharaoh, rather than the Pharaoh himself, in whom the
god had been incarnated. Horus brings the captive
northerner to the king, and presides over his kingdom;
but it is only over the royal Ka that he actually watches.
</p>

<p>
At Nekhen, the Horus-hawk, to whom the city was
dedicated, was represented under the form of a mummy.
It was here, perhaps, that the natron of El-Kab was first
employed to preserve the dead body from decay, and that
Horus was supposed to be entombed, like Osiris at
Abydos. At any rate, there is clearly a connection
between the dead and mummified Horus and the Horus
who stands above the name of the Pharaoh's double. It
is probable, therefore, that the identification of Horus
with the kings of Upper Egypt originated at Nekhen.
The Horus-hawk was the token under which they fought
and ruled; it was Horus who had led them to victory,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
and in whose name the Pharaonic Egyptians, with their
weapons of metal, overcame the neolithic population of
the Nile.
</p>

<p>
That Horus, accordingly, in one shape or another,
should have become the patron god of so many principalities
in Southern Egypt, is in no way astonishing.<note place='foot'>The 1st (Ombite) and 2nd (Apollinopolite) nomes, the 3rd nome
(originally) with its capital Nekhen, the nomes of the <q>Eastern and
Western Horus</q> (Tuphium and Asphynis), Qus <q>the city of Horus the
elder,</q> the 5th (Coptite) nome, the 6th nome of Dendera in so far as
Hathor was daughter and husband of Horus, the 10th (Antæopolite) and
12th (Hierakopolite) nomes, and finally the 15th, 18th, and 20th (Herakleopolite)
nomes. In the Delta also Horus was god of the 3rd, 5th, 7th,
8th, 11th, 19th, 25th, 27th, and 30th nomes, of which the 7th and 8th
were close to the Asiatic frontier.</note>
He represented the Pharaonic Egyptians; and as they
moved northward, subduing the older inhabitants of the
country, they carried his worship with them. At Heliopolis
he was adored as Hor-em-Khuti or Harmakhis,
<q>Horus issuing from the two horizons,</q> and identified
with Ra, the sun-god, the patron of the city. His image
may still be seen in the sphinx of Giza, with its human
head and lion's body. At Edfu, where the Pharaonic
invaders appear to have first established themselves, he
was worshipped as Hor-beḥudet under the form of a
winged solar disc, a combination of the orb of the sun
with the wings of the hawk.<note place='foot'>When this emblem was first invented we do not know; it probably
goes back to the præ-Menic period, like the composite animals on the early
monuments of Nekhen and Abydos. Its first dateable occurrence is on a
boulder of granite in the island of Elephantinê above the name and figure
of Unas of the Fifth Dynasty. It is also engraved above the double
figure of an Old Empire king on a great isolated rock near El-Kab, which
is probably of the same date. The tablet on which it is engraved faces
south-east.</note> A legend inscribed on the
walls of the temple, which is a curious mixture of folklore
and false etymologising, worked up after the fashion
of Lemprière by the priests of the Ptolemaic period,
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
knows exactly when it was that this emblem of the god
came into existence. It was in the three hundred and
sixty-third year of the reign of Ra-Harmakhis on earth,
when he fled from the rebels who had risen against
him in Nubia and had landed at Edfu. Here Hor-beḥudet,
the local deity, paid homage to his suzerain
and undertook to destroy his enemies. But first, he
flew up to the sun <q>as a great winged disc,</q> in order
that he might discover where they were. Then in his
new form he returned to the boat of Harmakhis, and
there Thoth addressed Ra, saying: <q>O lord of the gods,
the god of Edfu (<foreign rend='italic'>Beḥudet</foreign>) came in the shape of a great
winged disc: from henceforth he shall be called Hor-beḥudet.</q>
It was after this that Horus of Edfu and his
followers, <q>the smiths,</q> smote the foe from the southern
to the northern border of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The legend, or rather the prosaic fiction in which it
has been embodied, has been composed when the original
character of Horus had long been forgotten, and when
the sun-god of Heliopolis had become the dominant god
of Egypt. It belongs to the age of theological syncretism,
when the gods of Egypt were resolved one into the other
like the colours in a kaleidoscope, and made intangible
and ever-shifting forms of Ra. But it bears witness to
one fact,&mdash;the antiquity of the worship of Horus of
Edfu and of the emblem which was associated with him.
The winged solar disc forms part of his earliest history.
</p>

<p>
The fact is difficult to reconcile with the view of
Professor Maspero, that Horus was originally the sky,
and is in favour of the general belief of Egyptologists,
that he was from the outset the sun-god. Such, at all
events, was the opinion of the Egyptians themselves in
the later period of their history. In the Pyramid texts
Horus already appears as a solar deity, and it is only as
the sun-god that his identification with the Pharaohs can
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
be explained. It was not the sky but the sun who
watched over the names of their doubles. It is true
that the two eyes of Horus were said to be the sun and
the moon, and that a punning etymology, which connected
his name with the word <foreign rend='italic'>her</foreign> or <q>face,</q> caused him
to be depicted as the face of the sky, the four locks of
hair of which were the four cardinal points. But the
etymology is late, and there is no more difficulty in
understanding how the solar and lunar discs can be
called the eyes of the sun-god, than there is in understanding
how the winged disc was distinguished from
him, or how even in modern phrase the <q>eye</q> may be
used as a synonym of the whole man. When we speak
of <q>the eye of God,</q> we mean God Himself.<note place='foot'>Hor-merti, <q>Horus of the two eyes,</q> was worshipped at Shedennu in
the Pharbæthite nome of the Delta. Grébaut's view, that the two eyes
originally represented the light, seems to me too abstract a conception
for an early period (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, pp. 72-87, 112-131). In the
Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Rec.</hi> iv. p. 42), mention is made of Horus with <q>the blue
eyes.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
There is, however, one newly-discovered monument
which may be claimed in support of Professor Maspero's
theory. Above the Horus-hawk which surmounts the
name of the Third Dynasty king found at Nekhen, is the
hieroglyph of the sky. But the explanation of this is
not difficult to find. On the one hand, the hieroglyph
embraces the hawk as the sky does the sun; on the other
hand, it gives the pronunciation of the name of Horus,
the sky in Egyptian being <foreign rend='italic'>her</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>hor</foreign>, <q>the high</q> and
uplifted. And the name of Hor-em-Khuti or Harmakhis,
<q>the Horus who issues from the two horizons,</q> must be
quite as old as the monument of Nekhen. What the
two horizons were is shown us by the hieroglyph which
depicts them. They were the twin mountains between
which the sun came forth at dawn, and between which
he again passes at sunset.
</p>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<p>
The hieroglyph belongs to the very beginning of
Pharaonic Egyptian history. It may have been brought
by the Pharaonic immigrants from their old home in the
East. It is at least noticeable that in the Sumerian
language of primitive Babylonia the horizon was called
<foreign rend='italic'>kharra</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>khurra</foreign>, a word which corresponds letter for
letter with the name of Horus. The fact may, of course,
be accidental, and the name of the Egyptian god may
really be derived from the same root as that from which
the word for <q>heaven</q> has come, and which means <q>to
be high.</q> But the conception of the twin-mountains
between which the sun-god comes forth every morning,
and between which he passes again at nightfall, is of
Babylonian origin. On early Babylonian seal-cylinders
we see him stepping through the door, the two leaves of
which have been flung back by its warders on either
side of the mountains, while rays of glory shoot upward
from his shoulders. The mountains were called Mas,
<q>the twins,</q> in Sumerian; and the great Epic of Chaldæa
narrated how the hero Gilgames made his way to them
across the desert, to a land of darkness, where scorpion-men,
whose heads rise to heaven while their breasts
descend to hell, watched over the rising and the setting
of the sun. It is difficult to believe that such a conception
of the horizon could ever have arisen in Egypt.
There the Delta is a flat plain with no hills even in
sight, while in the valley of Upper Egypt there are
neither high mountains nor twin peaks.
</p>

<p>
Horus himself is, I believe, to be found in the Babylonian
inscriptions. Mention is occasionally made in
them of a god Khar or Khur, and in contracts of the
time of Khammurabi (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 2200) we find the name of
Abi-Khar, <q>my father is Khar.</q> But the age of Khammurabi
was one of intercourse between Babylonia and
Egypt, and the god Khar or Horus is therefore probably
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
borrowed from Egypt, just as a seal-cylinder informs us
was the case with Anupu or Anubis.<note place='foot'>Cf. Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>TSBA.</hi>, Nov. 1898. In one case the name of the god is
written <foreign rend='italic'>Kha-ar</foreign>. In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 55. 36, Khur-galzu, <q>Horus, thou art
great!</q> is given as the name of a Sumerian goddess.</note>
</p>

<p>
But though the name of Khar or Khur is and must
remain Egyptian, Horus has much in common with the
Babylonian sun-god Nin-ip. They are both warrior-gods;
and just as the followers of Horus were workers
in iron, so Nin-ip also was the god of iron. One of his
titles, moreover, is that of <q>the southern sun</q>; and on a
boundary-stone the eagle standing on a perch is stated
to be <q>the symbol of the southern sun.</q><note place='foot'>Nin-ip was identified with the planet Saturn, like <q>Horus the
bull.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The goddess with whom Horus of Nekhen was associated
was Nekheb with the vulture's head. Her temple
stood opposite Nekhen at El-Kab on the eastern bank of
the Nile, and at the end of the long road which led
across the desert from the Red Sea. It was at once a
sanctuary and a fortress defending Nekhen on the east.
But Nekheb was the goddess not only of Nekhen, but of
all Southern Egypt. We find her in the earliest inscriptions
on the sacred island of Sehêl in the Cataract, where
she is identified with the local goddess Sati. We find
her again at Thebes under the name of Mut, <q>the
mother.</q> Her supremacy, in fact, went back to the
days when Nekhen was the capital of the south, and its
goddess accordingly shared with it the privileges of
domination. When Nekhen fell back into the position
of a small provincial town, Nekheb also participated in
its decline. Under the Theban dynasties, it is true, the
name of Mut of Karnak became honoured throughout
Egypt, but her origin by that time had been forgotten.
The Egyptian who brought his offering to Mut never
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
realised that behind the mask of Mut lay the features of
Nekheb of Nekhen.
</p>

<p>
Mut, however, continued to wear the vulture form,
and the titles assumed by the king still preserved a
recollection of the time when Nekheb was the presiding
goddess of the kingdom of the south. From the days
of Menes onward, in the title of <q>king of Upper and
Lower Egypt,</q> while the serpent of Uazit symbolised
the north, the vulture of Nekheb symbolised the south.
At times, indeed, the uræus of Uazit is transferred to
Nekheb; but that was at an epoch when it had come
to signify <q>goddess,</q> as the Horus-hawk signified <q>god.</q>
From the earliest ages, however, the plant which denoted
the south, and formed part of the royal title, was used
in writing her name. She was emphatically <q>the
southerner,</q> the mistress of the south, just as her
consort, the mummified Horus, was its lord.
</p>

<p>
The euhemerising legends of Edfu made Horus the
faithful vassal of his liege lord Ra Harmakhis of Heliopolis.
But from a historical point of view the relations
between the two gods ought to have been reversed, and
the legends themselves contained a reminiscence that
such was the case. In describing the victorious march
of Horus and his followers towards the north, they tell
us how he made his way past Heliopolis into the Delta,
and even established one of his <q>forges</q> on its easternmost
borders. The Horus kings of Upper Egypt made
themselves masters of the northern kingdom, introducing
into it the divine hawk they worshipped and the Horus
title over their names.
</p>

<p>
The sun-god of Heliopolis was represented, like the
gods of Babylonia, as a man and not as a hawk. He
was known as Tum or Atmu, who, in the later days of
religious syncretism, was distinguished from the other
forms of the sun-god as representing the setting sun.
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
But Tum was the personal name of the sun-god; the
sun itself was called Ra. As time went on, the attributes
of the god were transferred to the sun; Ra, too,
became divine, and, after being first a synonym of Tum,
ended by becoming an independent deity. While Tum
was peculiarly the setting sun, Ra denoted the sun-god
in all his forms and under all his manifestations. He
was thus fitted to be the common god of all Egypt, with
whom the various local sun-gods could be identified, and
lose in him their individuality. Ra was a word which
meant <q>the sun</q> in all the dialects of the country, and
its very want of theological associations made it the
starting-point of a new phase of religious thought.
</p>

<p>
It was not until the rise of the Twelfth Dynasty that
a special temple was built to Ra in Heliopolis.<note place='foot'>It was then that the two obelisks were erected in front of the temple
by Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, which caused it to be known as Hât-Benbeni, <q>the
house of the two obelisks.</q></note> Up to
that time Ra had been content to share with Tum the
ancient temple of the city, or rather had absorbed Tum
into himself and thus become its virtual possessor. But
his religious importance goes back to prehistoric times.
The temple of Heliopolis became the centre of a theological
school which exercised a great influence on the
official religion of Egypt. It was here that the sun-worship
was organised, and the doctrine of creation by
generation or emanation first developed; it was here,
too, that the chief gods of the State religion were formed
into groups of nine.<note place='foot'>The members of the Ennead of Heliopolis or On are named in the
Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> ii. 666) Tum, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis,
Set, and Nebhât.</note>
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of these Enneads or groups of nine was
destined to play an important part in the official creed.
From Heliopolis it spread to other parts of Egypt, and
eventually each of the great sanctuaries had its own
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
Ennead, formed on the model of that of Heliopolis. At
Heliopolis the cycle of the nine supreme gods contained
Shu and Tefnut, Seb and Mut, Osiris and Isis, Set
and Nebhât, the four pairs who had descended by successive
acts of generation from Tum, the original god of
the nome. We owe the explanation and analysis of the
Ennead to Professor Maspero, who has for the first time
made the origin of it clear.<note place='foot'>See his <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. p.
337 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Tum, who is always represented in human form, was
the ancient sun-god and tutelary deity of Heliopolis.
To him was ascribed the creation of the world, just as it
was ascribed by each of the other nomes to their chief
god. But whereas at the Cataract the creator was a
potter who had made things from clay, or at Memphis
an artist who had carved them out of stone, so it was as
a father and generator that Tum had called the universe
into being. In the Book of the Dead it is said of him
that he is <q>the creator of the heavens, the maker of (all)
existences, who has begotten all that there is, who gave
birth to the gods, who created himself, the lord of life
who bestows upon the gods the strength of youth.</q> An
origin, however, was found for him in Nu, the primeval
abyss of waters, though it is possible that Professor
Maspero may be right in thinking that Nu really owes his
existence to the goddess Nut, and that he was introduced
into the cosmogony of Heliopolis under the influence of
Asiatic ideas. However this may be, Shu and Tefnut,
who immediately emanated from him, apparently represented
the air. Later art pictured them in Asiatic style
as twin lions sitting back to back and supporting between
them the rising or setting sun.<note place='foot'>Similarly, on early Babylonian seal-cylinders the leaves of the folding
doors through which the sun-god comes forth at daybreak are surmounted
by lions. See the illustration in King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion and Mythologie</hi>,
p. 32. (The genuineness of this cylinder has been questioned
without good reason.)</note> But an old
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
legend described Shu as having raised the heavens above
the earth, where he still keeps them suspended above
him like the Greek Atlas. A text at Esna, which
identifies him with Khnum, describes him as sustaining
<q>the floor of the sky upon its four supports</q> or cardinal
points; <q>he raised Nut, and put himself under her like
a great column of air.</q> Tefnut, his twin sister, was the
north wind, which gives freshness and vigour to the
world.
</p>

<p>
The next pair in the Ennead of Heliopolis were Seb
and Nut, the earth and the firmament, who issued from
Shu and Tefnut. Then came Osiris and Isis, the
children of the earth and sky, and lastly Set and
Nebhât, the one the representative of the desert land
in which the Asiatic nomads pitched their tents, the
other of the civilised Egyptian family at whose head
stood <foreign rend='italic'>Neb-hât</foreign>, <q>the lady of the house.</q> Upon the
model of this Ennead two other minor Enneads were
afterwards formed.
</p>

<p>
But it was only its first father and generator who was
the god of the nome in which the temple of Heliopolis
stood. The deities who were derived from him in the
priestly cosmogony were fetched from elsewhere. They
were either elementary deities like Shu and Seb, or else
deities whose worship had already extended all over
Egypt, like Osiris and Isis. The goddess Nebhât seems
to have been invented for the purpose of providing Set
with a sister and a consort; perhaps Tefnut, too, had
originally come into existence for the same reason.
</p>

<p>
The Ennead, once created, was readily adopted by the
other nomes of Egypt. It provided an easy answer to
that first question of primitive humanity: what is the
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
origin of the world into which we are born? The
answer was derived from the experience of man himself;
as he had been born into the world, so, too, it was
natural to suppose that the world itself had been born.
The creator must have been a father, and, in a land
where the woman held a high place in the family, a
mother as well. Though Tum continued to be pictured
as a man, no wife was assigned him; father and mother
in him were one.
</p>

<p>
It is impossible not to be reminded of similar supreme
gods in the Semitic kingdoms of Asia. Asshur of Assyria
was wifeless;<note place='foot'>The wife occasionally provided for Asshur by the scribes was a mere
grammatical abstraction, like Tumt, the feminine of Tum, whose name is
now and then met with in late Egyptian texts.</note> so also was Chemosh of Moab. Nor does
the analogy end here. Creation by generation was a
peculiarly Semitic or rather Babylonian doctrine. The
Babylonian Epic of the Creation begins by describing the
generation of the world out of Mummu or Chaos. And
the generation is by pairs as in the Ennead of Heliopolis.
First, Mummu, the one primeval source of all things; then
Lakhmu and Lakhamu, who correspond with Shu and
Tefnut; next, Ansar and Kisar, the firmament and the
earth; and lastly, the three great gods who rule the
present world. Of one of these, Ea, the ruler of the
deep, Bel-Merodach the sun-god was born.
</p>

<p>
Between the Babylonian and the Egyptian schemes
the differences are slight. In the Ennead of Heliopolis,
Tum, the offspring of Nu, takes the place of Mummu, the
watery chaos; but this was because he was the god of
the State, and had therefore to be made the creator and
placed at the head of the gods. It merely interposes
another link in the chain of generation, separating Nu
from the two elemental deities which in the Babylonian
scheme proceeded immediately from it. For Nu was
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
the exact equivalent of the Babylonian Mummu. Both
denote that watery chaos out of which, it was believed,
all things have come. And what makes the fact the
more remarkable is, that though the conception of a
primeval watery chaos was natural in Babylonia, it was
not so in Egypt. Babylonia was washed by the waters
of the Persian Gulf, out of which Ea, the god of the deep,
had arisen, bringing with him the elements of culture, and
the waves of which at times raged angrily and submerged
the shore. But the Egyptians of history lived on
the banks of a river and not by the sea; it was a river,
too, whose movements were regular and calculable, and
which bestowed on them all the blessings they enjoyed.
So far from being an emblem of chaos and confusion, the
Nile was to them the author of all good. I do not see
how we can avoid the conclusion that between the
Ennead of Heliopolis with its theory of cosmology, and
the cosmological doctrines of Babylonia, a connection of
some sort must have existed.<note place='foot'>One of the old formulæ embedded in the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 86) reads
like a passage from a Sumerian hymn: <q>Hail to thee, great deep (<foreign rend='italic'>ageb</foreign>),
moulder of the gods, creator of men.</q> It belongs to Babylonia rather
than to Egypt, where the <q>great deep</q> could have been a matter only of
tradition.</note>
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the native name of Heliopolis is suggestive of
Asiatic relations. It is the On of the Old Testament,
and was called On of the north to distinguish it from
another On, the modern Erment, in the south. It was
symbolised by a fluted and painted column of wood,<note place='foot'>See Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Medum</hi>, p. 30.</note> in
which some have seen an emblem of the sun-god, like
the sun-pillars of Semitic faith. But the name of On
was not confined to Egypt. There was another Heliopolis
in Syria, called On of the Beka'a by Amos (i. 5),
where the sun-god was worshipped under the form of a
stone. And in Palestine itself Beth-el, <q>the house of
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
God,</q> was known in earlier ages as Beth-On. It is true
that the name of On may have been carried into Asia in
the days when the Hyksos dynasties ruled over Egypt,
but it is more probable that both Beth-On and the On
near Damascus go back to an older date. In any case
they testify to some kind of contact between the sun-worship
of Heliopolis in Egypt and that of Syria and
Palestine.<note place='foot'>The existence of other cities of the name in Upper Egypt, <q>On of the
south,</q> now Erment, and On, now Dendera, shows that it must go back
to the earliest epoch of Pharaonic Egypt. I believe that it is the
Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>unu</foreign>, <q>city,</q> and that the column which represented it hieroglyphically
denoted <q>a foundation</q> or <q>settlement.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Between Tum, the sun-god of Northern Egypt, and
Horus, the sun-god of the South, there was one notable
difference. While Horus was a hawk, Tum was a man.
In this respect, again, he resembled the gods of Babylonia,
who are always depicted in human form. It is difficult
to find any other Egyptian deity who was similarly
fortunate. Osiris, indeed, was originally a man, but at
an early date he became confounded with his symbol, the
ram, in his title of <q>lord of Daddu.</q> Professor Maspero
thinks that Khnum at the Cataract may also have been
originally a man; but if so, he too became a ram before
the beginning of history. Ptaḥ of Memphis and Anher
of This are the only other gods who appear consistently
in human shape, and Ptaḥ is a mummy, while Anher,
like Tum, was the sun.<note place='foot'>It will be shown in a future lecture that Osiris was the mummified
Anher. One is tempted to ask whether Ptaḥ is not similarly the
mummified Tum?</note>
</p>

<p>
With the adoption of the Ennead and the cosmological
ideas it embodied, a new element entered into the theology
of the Egyptian temples. This was the identification of
one god with another, or, to speak more exactly, the loss
of their individuality on the part of the gods. The
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
process was begun when the priests of Heliopolis took
such of the divinities as were recognised throughout
Egypt, and transmuted them into successive phases in
the creative action of their local god. It was completed
when other religious centres followed the example of
Heliopolis, and formed Enneads of their own. In each
case the local god stood of necessity at the head of the
Ennead, and in each case also he was assimilated to Tum.
Whatever may have previously been his attributes, he
thus became a form of the sun-god. A dual personality
was created, which soon melted into one.
</p>

<p>
But it was not as Tum that the sun-god of Heliopolis
thus made his way victoriously through the land of
Egypt. It was under the more general and undefined
name of Ra that he was accepted in the Egyptian
sanctuaries. Tum remained the local god of Heliopolis,
or else formed part of a solar trinity in which he represented
the setting sun. But Ra became a divine
Pharaoh, in whom the world of the gods was unified.
</p>

<p>
The kings of the Fifth Dynasty called themselves his
sons. Hitherto the Pharaohs had been incarnations of
the sun-god, like the earlier monarchs of Babylonia;
henceforward the title of Horus was restricted to their
doubles in the other world, while that of <q>Son of the
Sun</q> was prefixed to the birth-name which they bore on
earth. The same change took place also in Babylonia.
There it was due to the invasion of foreign barbarians,
and the establishment of a foreign dynasty at Babylon,
where the priests refused to acknowledge the legitimacy
of a king who had not been adopted as son by the
sun-god Bel-Merodach. Perhaps a similar cause was
at work in Egypt. The Fifth Dynasty came from
Elephantinê, an island which was not only on the
extreme frontier of Egypt, but was inhabited then as
now by a non-Egyptian race; it may be that the price of
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
their acknowledgment by the priests and princes of
Memphis was their acceptance of the title of <q>Son of
Ra.</q> It narrowed their pretensions to divinity, and at
the same time implied their submission to the god of
the great sanctuary which stood in such close relations
with Memphis. As we have seen, the first monument
on which the winged solar disc is found is that of a king
of the Fifth Dynasty; it there overshadows his figure
and his two names; but though the hawk of Horus
stands above the name of his double, his birth-name is
without the title of <q>Son of Ra.</q>
</p>

<p>
When once the principle had been adopted that the
leading gods of Egypt were but varying forms of the
sun-god, it was easy to construct Enneads, whatever
might be the number of the deities it was wished to
bring into them. Thus at Heliopolis itself Horus the
son of Isis was introduced, his confusion with the sun-god
Horus facilitating the process. At This, Anher was
identified with Shu; at Thebes, Amon was made one with
Tum and Ra, with Mentu and Mut. Where a goddess
was at the head of the local Pantheon the process was
the same; she interchanged with the other goddesses of
the country, and even with Tum himself. At all events,
Horapollo (i. 12) states that Nit of Sais was at once
male and female.
</p>

<p>
One result of all this kaleidoscopic interchange was
the growth of trinities in which the same god appears
under three separate forms. At Heliopolis, for example,
Harmakhis became identified with Tum, and the trinity
of Tum, Ra, and Harmakhis grew up, in which Harmakhis
was the sun of the morning and Tum of the evening, while
Ra embodied them both. From one point of view, in
fact, Harmakhis and Tum were but different aspects under
which Ra could be envisaged; from another point, Ra,
Tum, and Harmakhis were three persons in one god.
</p>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<p>
I believe that Professor Maspero is right in holding
that the Egyptian trinity is of comparatively late origin
and of artificial character.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. p. 270 sqq.</note> He points out that it presupposes
the Ennead, and in some cases, at least, can be
shown to have been formed by the union of foreign
elements. Thus at Memphis the triad was created by
borrowing Nefer-Tum from Heliopolis and Sekhet from
Latopolis, and making the one the son of the local god
Ptaḥ, and the other his wife. The famous trinity of Osiris,
Isis, and Horus, which became a pattern for the rest of
Egypt, was formed by transferring Nebhât and Anubis,
the allies of Osiris, to his enemy Set, and so throwing
the whole of the Osirian legend into confusion. The
trinity of Thebes is confessedly modern; it owed its
origin to the rise of the Theban dynasties, when Thebes
became the capital of Egypt, and its god Amon necessarily
followed the fortunes of the local prince. Mut,
<q>the mother,</q> a mere title of the goddess of Southern
Egypt, was associated with him, and the triad was
completed by embodying in it Ptaḥ of Memphis, who
had been the chief god of Egypt when Thebes was still
a small provincial town. At a subsequent date, Khonsu,
the moon-god, took the place of Ptaḥ.<note place='foot'>This has been proved by a stela of Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> of the Eleventh Dynasty,
discovered by M. Legrain in 1900, in the temple of Ptaḥ. Khonsu was
a mere epithet of the moon-god, meaning <q>wanderer.</q> In a later age
Khonsu was himself superseded by Mentu.</note>
</p>

<p>
We can thus trace the growth of the Egyptian trinity
and the ideas and tendencies which lay behind it. It
was the culminating stage in the evolution of the religious
system which took its first start among the
priests of Heliopolis. First creation by means of
generation, then the Ennead, and lastly the triad and
the trinity&mdash;such were the stages in the gradual process
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
of development. And the doctrine of the trinity
itself reached its highest point of perfection in that
worship of Osiris of which I shall speak in a future
lecture.
</p>

<p>
But the Ennead had other results besides the Egyptian
doctrine of the trinity. Generation in the case of
a god could not be the same as in the case of a man.
The very fact that Tum was wifeless proved this. It was
inevitable, therefore, that it should come to be conceived
of as symbolical like the generation of thought, all the
more since the deities who had proceeded from Tum
were all of them symbols representing the phenomena
of the visible world. Hence the idea of generation
passed naturally into that of emanation, one divine
being emanating from another as thought emanates from
thought. And to the Egyptian, with his love of symbolism
and disinclination for abstract thought, the expression
of an idea meant a concrete form. Seb and
Nut were the divine ideas which underlay the earth
and the firmament and kept them in existence, but they
were at the same time the earth and the firmament
themselves. They represented thought in a concrete
form, if we may borrow a phrase from the Hegelian
philosophy.
</p>

<p>
The principle of emanation was eagerly seized upon
by Greek thinkers in the days when Alexandria was
the meeting-place of the old world and the new. It
afforded an explanation not only of creation, but also
of the origin of evil, and had, moreover, behind it the
venerable shadow of Egyptian antiquity. It became
the basis and sheet-anchor of most of the Gnostic
systems, and through them made its way into Christian
thought. From another point of view it may be regarded
as an anticipation of the doctrine of evolution.
</p>

<p>
The work of the priestly college of Heliopolis was
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
accomplished long before the Pyramid texts were written
under the kings of the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties. The
Ennead appears in them as a long established doctrine,
with all its consequences. The solar faith had laid firm
hold of Egyptian religion, and gained a position from
which it was never to be dislodged. Henceforward
Egyptian religion was permeated by the ideas and beliefs
which flowed from it, and the gods and goddesses of
the land assumed a solar dress. Under the Nineteenth
Dynasty, if not before, a new view of the future life
obtained official sanction, which substituted the sun-god
for Osiris and the solar bark for the Osirian paradise.
But I must leave an account of it to another occasion,
and confine myself at present to the last and most
noteworthy development of solar worship in Egypt.
</p>

<p>
It is perhaps hardly correct to apply to it the term
development. It was rather a break in the religious
tradition of Egypt, an interruption in the normal evolution
of the Egyptian creed, which accordingly made but
little permanent impression on the religious history of
the nation. But in the religious history of mankind
it is one of the most interesting of episodes. Like
Mosaism in Israel, it preached the doctrine of monotheism
in Egypt; but unlike Mosaism, its success was
only temporary. Unlike Mosaism, moreover, it was a
pantheistic monotheism, and it failed accordingly in its
struggle with the nebulous polytheism of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
One of the last Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty
was Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> Since the conquest of Syria by
his ancestor Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, and the establishment of an
empire which extended to the banks of the Euphrates,
Asiatic manners and customs had poured into Egypt in
an ever-increasing flood, and with them the ideas and
religious beliefs of the Semitic East. Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>,
the father of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, had maintained the older
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
traditions of the Egyptian court, so far at least as
religion was concerned, though his mother and wife had
alike been foreigners. But his son appears to have been
young at the time of his father's death. He was accordingly
brought up under the eye and influence of his
mother Teie, and his temperament seems to have
seconded the teaching he received from her. His
features are those of a philosophic visionary rather
than of a man of action, of a religious reformer rather
than of a king. He flung himself eagerly into a religious
movement of which he was the mainspring and
centre, and for the first time in history there was persecution
for religion's sake.
</p>

<p>
For numberless centuries the Egyptian had applied the
title of <q>the one god</q> to the divinity he was adoring at
the moment, or who presided over the fortunes of his
city or nome. But he did not mean to exclude by it the
existence of other deities. The <q>one god</q> was unique
only to the worshipper, and to the worshipper only in
so far as his worship for the moment was addressed to
this <q>one god</q> alone. When with the growth of the
solar theory the deities of Egypt began to be resolved
into one another, the title came to signify that attribute
of divinity which unified all the rest. But to the
Egyptian, it must be remembered, the attribute was a
concrete thing; and though in one sense Amon and
Khnum and Horus denoted the attributes of Ra, in
another sense they were distinct personalities with a
distinct history behind them. The result was what I
have called a nebulous polytheism, in which the individual
deities of the Egyptian Pantheon had melted
like clouds into one another; they had lost their several
individualities, but had not gained a new individuality
in return. The conservative spirit, which forbade the
Egyptian to break with the traditions of the past and
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
throw aside any part of his heritage, prevented him from
taking the final step, and passing out of polytheism into
monotheism.
</p>

<p>
It was just this step, however, that was taken by
Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> and his followers, and which at once
stamps the non-Egyptian character of his religious reformation.
Henceforward there was to be but one God
in Egypt, a God who was omnipresent and omniscient,
existing everywhere and in everything, and who would
brook no rival at his side. He was not, indeed, a new
god, for he had already revealed himself to the generations
of the past under the form of Ra, and his visible symbol
was the solar disc. But Ra had been ignorantly worshipped;
unworthy language had been used of him, and
he had been confounded with gods who were no gods at
all. The new and purified conception of the supreme
divinity needed a new name under which it could be
expressed, and this was found in Aten, <q>the solar disc,</q>
or Aten-Ra, <q>the disc of the sun.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was not probable that Amon of Thebes and his
worshippers would bow their heads to the new faith
without a struggle. It was Amon who had led the fathers
of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> to victory, who had given them their
empire over the world, and upon whose city of Thebes
the spoils of Asia had been lavished. A fierce contest
broke out between the Theban priesthood and the
heretical king. The worship of Amon was proscribed, his
very name was erased from the monuments on which it
was engraved, and a shrine of the rival deity was erected
at the very gates of his ancient temple. The Pharaoh
changed his own name to that of Khu-n-Aten, <q>the glory
of the solar disc,</q> and thereby publicly proclaimed his renunciation
of the religion of which he was the official head.
</p>

<p>
But in the end the priests of Amon prevailed. Khu-n-Aten
was forced to leave the capital of his fathers,
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
and, carrying with him the State archives and the
adherents of the new faith, he built a new city for
himself midway between Minia and Siût, where the
mounds of Tel el-Amarna now mark its site. Here,
surrounded by a court which was more than half Asiatic
in blood and belief, he raised a temple to the new God
of Egypt, and hard by it a palace for himself. The new
creed was accompanied by a new style of art; the old
traditions of Egyptian art were thrown aside, and a
naturalistic realism, sometimes of an exaggerated character,
took their place. The palace and temple were
alike made glorious with brilliant painting and carved
stone, with frescoed floors and walls, with columns and
friezes inlaid with gold and precious stones, with panels
of pictured porcelain, and with statuary which reminds
us of that of later Greece.<note place='foot'>For the architectural plan of the temple, see Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Life in
Ancient Egypt</hi>, Eng. tr., p. 287.</note> Gardens were planted by
the edge of the Nile, and carriage roads constructed in
the desert, along which the king and his court took
their morning drives. Then, returning to his palace,
the Pharaoh would preach or lecture on the principles
and doctrines of the new faith.
</p>

<p>
It was officially called <q>the doctrine,</q> which, as
Professor Erman remarks, shows that it possessed a
dogmatically-formulated creed. Its teachings are embodied
in the hymns inscribed on the walls of the tombs
of Tel el-Amarna. The God, whose visible symbol is the
solar disc, is He, as we learn from them, who has created
all things, <q>the far-off heavens, mankind, the animals and
the birds; our eyes are strengthened by his beams, and
when he reveals himself all flowers grow and live; at
his rising the pastures bring forth, they are intoxicated
before his face; all the cattle skip on their feet, and the
birds in the marshes flutter with joy.</q> It is he <q>who
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
brings in the years, creates the months, makes the days,
reckons the hours; he is lord of time, according to whom
men reckon.</q><note place='foot'>Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Life in Ancient Egypt</hi>, Eng. tr., p. 262.</note> Beside Him, <q>there is no other</q> God.
</p>

<p>
<q>Beautiful is thy setting,</q> begins another hymn, <q>O
living Aten, thou lord of lords and king of the two
worlds! When thou unitest thyself with the heaven at
thy setting, mortals rejoice before thy countenance, and
give honour to him who has created them, and pray to
him who has formed them in the presence of Khu-n-Aten,
thy son, whom thou lovest, the king of Egypt who
liveth in truth. All Egypt and all lands within the
circle that thou treadest in thy glory, praise thee at thy
rising and at thy setting. O God, who in truth art the
living one, who standest before our eyes, thou createst
that which was not, thou formest it all; we also have
come into being through the word of thy mouth.</q><note place='foot'>Another strophe of the Hymn to Aten, as translated by Professor
Breasted (<hi rend='italic'>De Hymnis in Solem sub rege Amenophide <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> conceptis</hi>, p. 47), is
equally explicit: <q>Thou hast created the earth according to thy pleasure,
when thou wast alone, both all men and the cattle great and small; all
who walk upon the earth, those on high who fly with wings; the foreign
lands of Syria (<foreign rend='italic'>Khar</foreign>) and Cush as well as the land of Egypt; each in its
place thou appointest, thou providest them with all that they need; each
has his granary, his stores of grain are counted. Diverse are the
languages of men, more different than their shape is the colour of their
skin, (for) thou hast distinguished the nations of the world (one from the
other).</q> In the succeeding strophe the monotheism of the worshipper of
Aten, in whose eyes even the sacred Nile was the creature of the one true
God, appears in striking contrast to the ordinary polytheism of Egypt
(Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> p. 53): <q>Thou createst the Nile in the other world, thou
bringest it at thy pleasure to give life to mankind; for thou hast made
them for thyself, O lord of them all who art ever with them, O lord of all
the earth who risest for them, O sun of day (the mighty one in?) the
remotest lands, thou givest them their life, thou sendest forth the Nile in
heaven, that it may descend for them; it raises its waves mountain high
like the sea, it waters the fields of their cities. How glorious are thy
counsels! O lord of eternity, thou art a Nile in heaven for foreign men
and cattle throughout all the earth! They walk on their feet, (and) the
Nile cometh to Egypt from the other world.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
The solar disc was thus, as it were, the mask through
which the supreme Creator revealed himself. And this
Creator was the one true living God, living eternally,
brooking the worship of no other god at his side, and,
in fact, the only God who existed in truth. All other
gods were false, and the followers of Aten-Ra were
accordingly called upon to overthrow their worship and
convert their worshippers. At the same time, Aten
was the father of all things; he had called all things
into existence by the word of his mouth, men equally
with the beasts and birds, the flowers and the far-off
heaven itself. If, therefore, men refused to worship him,
it was because they had been led astray by falsehood
and ignorance, or else were wilfully blind.
</p>

<p>
Whatever measure of success the reforms of Khu-n-Aten
attained among the natives of Egypt, they must
have possessed in so far as they represented a reformation,
and not the introduction of a new and foreign cult.
There must have been a section of the people, more
especially among the educated classes, whose religious
ideas were already tending in that direction, and who
were therefore prepared to accept the new <q>doctrine.</q>
The language often used of the gods, if strictly interpreted,
implied a more or less modified form of monotheism;
the Egyptian deities, as we have seen, had come
to be resolved into manifestations of the sun-god, and
the symbol of the new faith enabled it to be connected
with the ancient worship of Ra. The old sun-worship
of Heliopolis formed a bridge which spanned the gulf
between Amon and Aten. Indeed, the worship of the
solar disc itself was not absolutely strange. An Egyptian,
for instance, who was buried at Kom el-Aḥmar,
opposite El-Kab, in the reign of Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, speaks of
being <q>beloved by the beams of the solar disc</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Aten-Ra</foreign>);
and though no determinative of divinity is attached
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
to the words, it was but a step forward to make the
disc the equivalent of the sun-god.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, between the <q>doctrine</q> of Khu-n-Aten
and the older Egyptian ideas of the sun-god there was a
vast, if not impassable, distance. The <q>doctrine</q> was no
result of a normal religious evolution. That is proved
not only by the opposition with which it met and the
violent measures that were taken to enforce it, but still
more by its rapid and utter disappearance or extermination
after the death of its royal patron. It came from
Asia, and, like the Asiatic officials, was banished from
Egypt in the national reaction which ended in the rise
of the Nineteenth Dynasty.
</p>

<p>
The god of Khu-n-Aten, in fact, has much in common
with the Semitic Baal. Like Baal, he is the <q>lord of
lords,</q> whose visible symbol is the solar orb. Like Baal,
too, he is a jealous god, and the father of mankind. It
is true that Baal was accompanied by the shadowy Baalat;
but Baalat, after all, was but his pale reflection, necessitated
by the genders of Semitic grammar; and in some
parts of the Semitic world even this pale reflection was
wanting. Chemosh of Moab, for instance, and Asshur
of Assyria were alike wifeless.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, between Aten and the Semitic
Baal there was a wide and essential difference. The
monotheism of Khu-n-Aten was pantheistic, and as a
result of this the god he worshipped was the god of the
whole universe. The character and attributes of the
Semitic Baal were clearly and sharply defined. He
stood outside the creatures he had made or the children
of whom he was the father. His kingdom was strictly
limited, his power itself was circumscribed. He was the
<q>lord of heaven,</q> separate from the world and from the
matter of which it was composed.
</p>

<p>
But Aten was in the things which he had created;
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
he was the living one in whom all life is contained, and
at whose command they spring into existence. There
was no chaos of matter outside and before him; he had
created <q>that which was not,</q> and had formed it all.
He was not, therefore, a national or tribal god, whose
power and protection did not extend beyond the locality
in which he was acknowleged and the territory on
which his high places stood; on the contrary, he was
the God of the whole universe; not only Egypt, but <q>all
lands</q> and all peoples are called upon to adore him, and
even the birds and the flowers grow and live through
him. For the first time in history, so far as we know,
the doctrine was proclaimed that the Supreme Being was
the God of all mankind.
</p>

<p>
The fact is remarkable from whatever point of view
it may be regarded. The date of Khu-n-Aten is about
1400 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, a century before the Exodus and the rise of
Mosaism. More than once it has been suggested that
between Mosaism and the <q>doctrine</q> of Aten there
may have been a connection. But in Mosaism we look
in vain for any traces of pantheism. The Yahveh of
the Commandments stands as much outside His creation
as the man whom He had made in His own image; His
outlines are sharply defined, and He is the God of the
Hebrews rather than of the rest of the world. The
first Commandment bears the fact on its forefront: other
nations have their gods whose existence is admitted,
but Yahveh is the God of Israel, and therefore Him only
may Israel serve.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture V. Animal Worship.</head>

<p>
St. Clement of Alexandria thus describes the religion of
his Egyptian neighbours (<hi rend='italic'>Pædag.</hi> iii. 2): <q>Among (the
Egyptians) the temples are surrounded with groves and
consecrated pastures; they are provided with propylæa,
and their courts are encircled with an infinite number
of columns; their walls glitter with foreign marbles and
paintings of the highest art; the sanctuary is resplendent
with gold and silver and electrum, and many-coloured
stones from India and Ethiopia; the shrine within it is
veiled by a curtain wrought with gold. But if you pass
beyond into the remotest part of the enclosure in the
expectation of beholding something yet more excellent,
and look for the image which dwells in the temple, a
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>pastophorus</foreign> or some other minister, singing a pæan in
the Egyptian language with a pompous air, draws aside a
small portion of the curtain, as if about to show us the
god; and makes us burst into a loud laugh. For no god
is found therein, but a cat, or a crocodile, or a serpent
sprung from the soil, or some such brute animal ... and
the Egyptian deity is revealed as a beast that rolls
itself on a purple coverlet.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Clement was a Christian philosopher and apologist,
but the animal worship of the Egyptians was quite as
much an object of ridicule to the pagan writers of Greece
and Rome. <q>Who has not heard,</q> says Juvenal (<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi>
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
xv.),&mdash;<q rend='pre'>who has not heard, where Egypt's realms are
named&mdash;</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>What monster gods her frantic sons have framed?</q></l>
<l>Here Ibis gorged with well-grown serpents, there</l>
<l>The crocodile commands religious fear;...</l>
<l>And should you leeks or onions eat, no time</l>
<l>Would expiate the sacrilegious crime;</l>
<l>Religious nations sure, and blest abodes,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Where every orchard is o'errun with gods!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A Roman soldier who had accidentally killed a cat was
torn to pieces by the mob before the eyes of Diodorus,
although the Romans were at the time masters of the
country, and the reigning Ptolemy did his utmost to save
the offender.<note place='foot'>Diod. Sic. i. 83.</note> For the majority of the people the cat
was an incarnate god.
</p>

<p>
This worship of animals was a grievous puzzle to
the philosophers of the classical age. The venerable
antiquity of Egypt, the high level of its moral code, and,
above all, the spiritual and exalted character of so much
of its religion, had deeply impressed the thinking world
of the Roman Empire. That world had found, in a
blending of Egyptian religious ideas with Greek metaphysics,
a key to the mysteries of life and death; in the
so-called Hermetic books the old beliefs and religious
conceptions of Egypt were reduced to a system and
interpreted from a Greek point of view, while the
Neo-Platonic philosophy was an avowed attempt to
combine the symbolism of Egypt with the subtleties of
Greek thought. But the animal worship was hard to
reconcile with philosophy; even symbolism failed to
explain it away, or to satisfy the mind of the inquirer.
Plutarch had boldly denied that the worship of an animal
was in any way more absurd than that of an image; the
deity, if so he chose, could manifest himself in either
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
equally well. Porphyry had recourse to the doctrine of
the transmigration of souls. If the soul migrated after
death into the body of some lower animal, he urged, it
would communicate to the latter a portion of the divine
essence. But after all this was no explanation of the
worship paid to the animal; the soul had not been
worshipped while it was still in the body of its original
possessor, and there was therefore no reason why it
should be worshipped when it was embodied in another
form. Moreover, metempsychosis in the Greek sense was
never an Egyptian doctrine. All the Egyptian held was
that the soul, after it had been justified and admitted to
a state of blessedness, could enter for a time whatever
material form it chose; could fly to heaven, for instance,
in the body of a swallow, or return to the mummified
body in which it had once dwelt. But such embodiments
were merely temporary, and matters of free choice;
they were like a garment, which the soul could put on
and take off at will.
</p>

<p>
Modern writers have found it as difficult to explain
the animal worship of ancient Egypt as the philosophers
and theologians of Greece and Rome. Creuzer declared
that it was the result of a poverty of imagination, and
that the beasts were worshipped because they embodied
certain natural phenomena. Lenormant argued, on the
other hand, that it was due to a high spiritual conception
of religion, which prevented the Egyptians from adoring
lifeless rocks and stones like the other nations of
antiquity. Of late the tendency has been to see in it a
sort of totemism which prevailed among the aboriginal
population of the country, and was tolerated by the
higher religion of the Pharaonic immigrants. In this
case it would represent the religion of the prehistoric
race or races, and its admittance into the official religion
would be paralleled by the history of Braḥmanism, which
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
has similarly tolerated the cults and superstitions of the
aboriginal tribes of India. Indeed, it is possible to discover
an analogous procedure in the history of Christianity
itself. The lower beliefs and forms of worship
can be explained away wherever needful with the help
of symbolism and allegory, while the mass of the people
are left in the undisturbed enjoyment of the religious
ideas and rites of their forefathers.
</p>

<p>
Recent discoveries, however, have cast a new light on
the matter. The early monuments of Egyptian history,
found in the neolithic graves and among the remains of
the first dynasties, have shown that the animal worship
of Egypt was only part of a larger system. Slate plaques,
on which are represented the actions of Pharaohs who
preceded Menes or were his immediate successors, prove
that the prevailing system of religion must have been one
closely akin to African fetishism. The gods appear
frequently, but they always appear under the form of
what in later times were regarded as their symbols.
Sometimes the symbol is an animal or bird, but sometimes
also it is a lifeless object. The human forms, to
which we are accustomed in later Egyptian art, are
absent;<note place='foot'>Except in the case of Osiris at Abydos; Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>The Royal Tombs of
the First Dynasty</hi>, pt. i. pl. xv. 16; comp. also at Kom el-Aḥmar, <hi rend='italic'>Hierakonpolis</hi>,
pt. i. pl. xxvi. B, though here it seems to be the Pharaoh who
is represented.</note> there is nothing to tell us that the religion of
the time was in any way distinguished from the fetishism
of Dahomey or the Congo.
</p>

<p>
Thus on a slate plaque from Kom el-Aḥmar (opposite
El-Kab<note place='foot'>Quibell in the <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache</hi>, xxxvi. pls. xii.,
xiii.; <hi rend='italic'>Hierakonpolis</hi>, pt. i. pl. xxix.</note>) we see the Pharaoh entering the hall in which
lie the bodies of his decapitated foes, while four standards
are borne before him. On the first two are the hawks
of Horus, on the third the jackal of Anubis, on the last
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
an object which may be intended for a lock of hair.<note place='foot'>On a stela in the Wadi Maghara, in the Sinaitic Peninsula, Sahu-Ra
of the Fifth Dynasty, divided into two figures, one with the crown of Lower
Egypt the other with that of Upper Egypt, is standing before a standard
on which are the two emblems of Southern and Northern Egypt, Set and
Horus. Set is represented by his usual animal, but Horus by an uræus
serpent and the same symbol as that on the plaque (de Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, i. p. 233). As we learn from the legend of
Seb recounted at At-Nebes (Saft el-Henna), the two relics preserved there
were the uræus and lock of hair of Ra. The lock of hair has practically
the same form as the symbol we are considering here, and long before the
legend had been concocted, Ra and Horus had been identified together
(see Griffith, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities of Tell el-Yahudiyeh, Seventh Memoir of the
Egypt Exploration Fund</hi>, pl. xxiii.).</note> On
the reverse of the plaque the god is bringing before him
the prisoners of the north. But the god is a hawk,
whose human hand grasps the rope by which the conquered
enemy is dragged along. On a plaque of equally
early date, found at Abydos, five standards are depicted,
the foot of each of which is shaped like a hand holding a
rope. Above the first two standards are the jackals of
Anubis, on the next the ibis of Thoth, then the hawk
of Horus, and, finally, the curious object which is the
emblem of Min. On a still older plaque from the same
locality the names of the cities ruled (or conquered) by
the Pharaoh are inscribed, each within its battlemented
wall, while above is the animal god by which it is said
to be <q>beloved</q> or perhaps <q>destroyed.</q> The last of
the cities is <q>the royal</q> capital, above which stand the
two hawks of Horus, who are perched on the standards
of the king; behind it are the names of the other towns
under the protection of the scorpion of Selk, the lion of
Sekhet, and the hawk of Horus.<note place='foot'>De Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, ii. pls. ii. and iii.;
Sayce in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, Feb.
1898. It will be noticed that Thoth is represented by the ibis and not by
the ape.</note>
</p>

<p>
But we can trace the standards and the symbols upon
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
them still farther back. M. de Morgan has pointed out
that the rude and primitive boats painted on the pottery
of the prehistoric graves have their prows ornamented
with standards which are precisely the same in shape as
the standards that were borne before the Pharaoh. On
the top of one is perched a hippopotamus, on another a
fish; on another is a flowering branch, on another the
sail of a ship.<note place='foot'>De Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, p. 93.</note> We may conclude, therefore, that both
standards and symbols were characteristic of the older
population of the country whom the Pharaonic Egyptians
found when they entered it. But the symbols had no
connection with any kind of writing; we look in vain,
either on the pottery or on any other object of prehistoric
art, for hieroglyphic signs. The standard may have been
adopted by the invading race from their conquered
subjects, and so introduced into their system of writing;
originally it was nothing but a primeval flagstaff at the
prow of a boat. And, like the flagstaff, the symbol that
served as a flag must have been of aboriginal invention.
</p>

<p>
Such, then, is the conclusion to which we are led by
the newly-found monuments of early Egypt. On the
Pharaonic monuments of that remote age the gods are
not yet human; they are still represented by animals
and other fetishes. And these fetishes have been
borrowed from the older population of the valley of the
Nile, along with the so-called standard on the top of
which they were placed.
</p>

<p>
The standard with the emblem upon it denoted a
nome in the historical days of Egypt. The emblem
represented the god of the nome, or rather of the chief
sanctuary in the nome. Where the god of the nome
was Horus, the hawk appeared upon the standard; where
two Horus-gods were worshipped, there were two hawks.
As the prehistoric boat had been placed under the protection
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
of the deity whose fetish or symbol was planted
at its prow, so the nome was under the protection of the
god whose emblem was erected on its standard. The
standards borne before the Pharaoh on the plaque of Kom
el-Aḥmar were the standards of the nomes over which
he claimed rule.
</p>

<p>
It would seem, then, that the god of a nome was in
most instances the god of the aboriginal tribe which
originally inhabited it, and that the symbols by which
these gods were known were primitively the gods themselves.
On the plaque of Abydos it is not Selk or
Sekhet who is the protecting deity of the city, but the
scorpion and the lion. And by the side of animals and
birds, as we have seen, we find also inanimate objects
which are on exactly the same footing as the animals
and birds. The primitive religion of Egypt must have
been a form of fetishism.
</p>

<p>
But in passing from the older population to the Asiatic
immigrants it underwent a change. The same slate
plaques which portray Horus as a hawk and Anubis as a
jackal, represent the king under the likeness of a bull.
It is a literal pictorial rendering of the phrase so often
met with in the inscriptions, in which the Pharaoh is
described as a bull trampling on his enemies. The
animal has ceased to represent the actual reality, and has
become a symbol.
</p>

<p>
And this symbolism, it will be noticed, accompanies
the introduction of symbolic writing. The figure of the
bull which denotes the Pharaoh, is as much a symbol as
the fish which forms part of his name. It is therefore
fair to conclude that the hawk which brings the captured
enemy to the king is also a symbol. The fetish has become
symbolic; the hawk is no longer a god in and for
itself, but because it is the embodiment of the divine
Horus.
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
It was but a step further to unite the symbol with the
human form. The process involved the disuse of inanimate
objects; only the living could be fitly joined together.
Horus could be depicted as a man with a hawk's
head; it was less easy to combine the symbol of Min
with a man's limbs. Such anthropomorphising followed
necessarily from the deification of the Pharaoh. The
race which turned its human leader into a god was bound
to represent its gods under human form. In Egypt,
however, the older element in the population, with its
religious ideas, was too strong to be wholly disregarded
by the ruling caste. The compromise, which had transformed
the fetish into a symbol, ended by retaining the
animal forms of the gods, but in subordination to the
form of man. Henceforth, for the State religion, Horus
wore merely the mask of a hawk.<note place='foot'>For late examples of the worship of animals like the cat, ram, swallow,
or goose, as animals and not as incarnations of an official god, see Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. p. 395 sqq. The
rarity of them is due to their representing private and domestic cults not
recognised by the religion of the State. <q>The worship of the swallow,
cat, and goose, which had commenced as the pure and simple adoration of
these creatures in themselves, always remained so for the multitude. We
must not forget that Orientals regard beasts somewhat differently from
ourselves. They ascribe to them a language, a knowledge of the future,
an extreme acuteness of the senses which allows them to perceive objects
and beings invisible to man. It was not, indeed, all Egypt that worshipped
in the beast the beast itself; but a considerable part of it which belonged
almost entirely to the same social condition, and represented pretty much
the same moral and intellectual ideas.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
That the official figures of the gods were thus a compromise
between two antagonistic currents of religious
thought, appears very clearly when we compare Egypt
with Babylonia. In Babylonia, also, there were symbols
attached to the gods, some of them representing animals
and birds, others inanimate objects. In Babylonia, moreover,
the king was a god, both in his lifetime and after
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
his death. But in Babylonia the figures of the gods of
the State religion were all human; it was only the
demons of the popular cult who were allowed to retain
the bodies of beasts and birds. The gods themselves
were all depicted in human form. The reason of this
is simple: in Babylonia the Semitic conception of the
deity was predominant; there was no fetishism to be
conciliated, no animal worship to be reconciled with a
higher faith. The emblems of the gods remained emblems,
and the gods of heaven clothed themselves with
the same form as the human god on earth.
</p>

<p>
In the retention of the primitive animal worship,
therefore, we must see an evidence not only of the
strength of that portion of the population to whom it
originally belonged, but also of the conservative spirit
which characterised the Egyptians. In this case, however,
the conservative spirit was the result of the influence
of the conquered race; art continued to represent
Horus with the head of a hawk, just because those who
believed him to be a bird continued to form an important
part of the population. The popular cult and
the popular superstitions were too widely spread to be
disregarded.
</p>

<p>
Egyptian orthodoxy found a ready way in which to
explain the animal forms of its gods. The soul, once
freed from its earthly body, could assume whatever shape
it chose, or rather, could inhabit as long as it would
whatever body it chose to enter. And what was true of
the human soul was equally true of the gods. They
too were like men, differing indeed from men only in so
far as they were already in the other world, and thus
freed from the trammels and limitations of our present
existence. The soul of Ra, which was practically Ra
himself, could appear under the form of a bird, if so he
willed. Transmigration from one body to another, indeed,
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
never presented any difficulty to the Egyptian
mind. It could be effected by the magician by means
of his spells; and there were stories, like the folk-tales of
modern Europe, which told how the life and individuality
of a man could pass into the bodies of animals, and even
into seeds and trees. The belief is common to most
primitive peoples, and is doubtless due to the dreams in
which the sleeper imagines himself possessed of some
bodily form that is not his own.
</p>

<p>
We must then regard the animal worship of Egypt
as the survival of an early fetishism. But it is a survival
which has had to accommodate itself to the antagonistic
conceptions of an anthropomorphic faith. By the
side of the deified king the deified animal was allowed to
remain, and man and beast were mixed together in religious
art. It was parallel to the juxtaposition of
pictorial ideographs and phonetically-spelt words in the
writing of a later day. And just as it was only the
cultivated classes to whom the written characters were
symbols with a meaning other than that which they bore
to the eye, so too it was only these same cultivated
classes to whom the sacred animals were symbols and
embodiments of the deity, rather than the deity itself.
The masses continued to be fetish-worshippers like the
earlier inhabitants of the country from whom most of
them drew their descent.
</p>

<p>
To this fact we must ascribe the extraordinary hold
which the worship of animals had upon the Egyptian
people as a whole up to the period of their conversion to
Christianity. While the walls of the temple were covered
with pictures in which the gods were represented in
human or semi-human form, the inner shrine which they
served to surround and protect contained merely the
beast or bird in which the deity was believed to be incarnated
for the time. When the god revealed himself
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
to his worshipper, it was as a hawk or a crocodile. The
fact would be inexplicable if the priests alone were privileged
to see him, as has often been maintained. Such,
however, was not the case. Every Egyptian, whatever
might be his rank and station, could follow the processions
in the temple, could enter its inner chambers, and
gaze upon the incarnated deity, provided only that he
had conformed to the preliminary requirements of the
ritual and were not unclean.<note place='foot'>See Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten Aegypten</hi>, pp. 108, 109.</note> The temple was not the
exclusive property of a privileged caste; it was only the
foreigner and the unbeliever who was forbidden to tread
its courts. It was open to the Egyptian populace, and
to the populace the sacred animals were the gods themselves.
</p>

<p>
We do not know whether the hawk which represented
Horus, and in which the soul of the god tabernacled for
a time, was distinguished from other hawks by special
marks. We know, however, that this was the case with
some of the sacred animals. According to Herodotus
(iii. 28), the bull Apis of Memphis was required to be
black, with a white triangle on his forehead, an eagle on
his back, double hairs in his tail, and a beetle on his
tongue; and though the extant figures of the god do not
support the precise description given by the Greek writer,
they show that certain characteristic marks were really
required. In this way the incarnation of the god was
separated from other animals of the same species, upon
whom, however, some part of his divinity was reflected.
Since any bull might have become the habitation of the
deity, it was necessary to treat the whole species with
respect.
</p>

<p>
The bull Apis was an incarnation of Ptaḥ, <q>the new
life of Ptaḥ,</q> as he is often called on the votive tablets.
We must see in him accordingly the local fetish of the
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
pre-dynastic Egyptians who lived in the district where
Memphis afterwards arose. In fact the bull was sacred
throughout the whole of this region. In the neighbouring
city of Heliopolis the place of Apis was taken by
another bull, Ur-mer, or Mnevis, as the Greeks miscalled
him. Mnevis was the incarnation of the sun-god, and,
like Apis, it was needful that he should be black. Nor
was the worship of the bull confined to the north. At
Erment also, near Thebes, Mentu, the god of the nome,
was incarnated in the bull Bakis.<note place='foot'>Late inscriptions call Bakh or Bakis <q>the living soul of Ra,</q> but
this was when Mentu and Ra had been identified together. Stelæ of the
Roman period, however, from Erment represent the sacred bull without
any solar emblem, while by the side of it stands a hawk-headed crocodile
crowned with the orb of the sun. It is possible that the latter may be
connected with the hawk-headed crocodile, with the orb of the sun on its
head and an uræus serpent at the end of its tail, which in Greek <foreign rend='italic'>graffiti</foreign>
at Philæ is called Ptiris.</note> The sanctity of the
bull is not difficult to understand among an agricultural
people in an early stage of development. In India the
bull is still sacred; and Sir Samuel Baker tells us that
the tribes of the Upper Nile still abstain from eating the
flesh of the ox. In Phrygia the slaughter of an ox was
punishable with death;<note place='foot'>Nicolaus Damascen., <hi rend='italic'>Fr.</hi> 128, ed. Müller.</note> the first king of the country
was supposed to have been a peasant, and his ox-drawn
cart was preserved in the temple of Kybelê. Among
the Egyptians themselves, as we have seen, the Pharaoh
was symbolised under the form of a bull at the very
beginning of history.
</p>

<p>
The bull, then, must have been worshipped in the
neighbourhood of Memphis and Heliopolis before it became
the incarnation of Ptaḥ or Ra. It follows, moreover,
that as yet it was no one particular bull to whom
divine honours were paid; there was no one particular
bull into whom the soul of one of the gods of the
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
Pharaonic Egyptians had as yet entered, thus setting
it apart from all others. The bull was still a fetish
pure and simple; it was the whole species that was
sacred, and not a single member of it.
</p>

<p>
That this was indeed the case, is proved by a custom
which lasted down to the latest times. Not only was
the sacred bull or the sacred hawk mummified after
death, but other bulls and hawks also. There were
cemeteries of mummified animals, just as there were
cemeteries of mummified men. Vast cemeteries of cats
have been found at Bubastis, at Beni-Hassan, and other
places; so too there were cemeteries of hawks and
crocodiles, of jackals and bulls. We are still ignorant
of the exact conditions under which these creatures were
embalmed and buried. It is impossible to suppose that
a solemn burial was provided for all the individual members
of a species which was accounted sacred in a particular
nome, much less for all its individual members
throughout Egypt, as seems to have been imagined by
Herodotus (ii. 41); there must have been certain limitations
within which such a burial was permitted or ordained.
And sometimes there was no burial at all; the
mummy of the sacred animal of Set, for instance, has
never been found.
</p>

<p>
Still the fact remains that not only were the bodies of
the Apis or the Mnevis mummified and consigned to a
special burying-place, but the bodies of other bulls as
well. Doubtless the Egyptian of the Pharaonic period
had an excellent reason to give for the practice. Just
as the servants of the prince were buried around their
master, or as the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>-figures were placed in the tomb
of the dead, so the ordinary bull was interred like the
divine incarnations of Ptaḥ and Ra, in the hope that its
double might accompany the spirit of the god in the
other world. The scenes of country life painted on the
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
walls of the tombs contain pictures of sheep and cattle
whose <foreign rend='italic'>kas</foreign> were, in some way or other, believed to exist
in the Egyptian paradise, and a mummified bull had as
much right to the hope of a future existence as a
mummified man. The very act of embalming implied
the possibility of its union with Osiris.
</p>

<p>
Egyptian logic soon converted the possibility into a
fact. With the growth of the Osirian cult the dead
Apis became, like the pious Egyptian, one with Osiris,
the lord of the other world. His identity with Ptaḥ
paled and disappeared before his newer identity with
Osiris. At first he was Osiris-Apis, <q>the Osirified bull-god,</q>
as guardian only of the necropolis of Memphis;
then as god also of both Memphis and Egypt in life as
well as in death. Under the Ptolemies, Greek ideas
gathered round the person of a deity who thus united in
himself the earlier and later forms of Egyptian belief,
and out of the combination rose the Serapis of the
classical age, whose worship exercised so great an influence
on the Roman world. In the features of the
human Serapis, with his majestic face and flowing beard,
it is difficult to recognise the bull-god of primitive Egypt.
</p>

<p>
The history of Serapis is on a large scale what that of
the other sacred animals of Egypt is on a smaller scale.
Mnevis was a lesser Apis; as Heliopolis waned before
Memphis, so did its divine bull before the rival deity of
the capital. They had both started on an equal footing,
and had followed the fortunes of the cities where they
were adored. At Mendes it was not a bull, but a ram,
that was the object of worship, and in which the priests
beheld an incarnation of Ra,<note place='foot'>De Rougé, <hi rend='italic'>Monnaies de nomes</hi>, p. 46.</note> though the accidental fact
that the word <foreign rend='italic'>ba</foreign> meant alike <q>ram</q> and <q>soul</q> caused
later generations to identify it with the <q>soul</q> of Osiris.
In the Fayyûm it was the crocodile which naturally became
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
the god Sebek or Sukhos, and at a later time Pete-sukhos,
<q>the gift of Sukhos.</q> In the latter name we
read the signs of a growing disinclination to see in the
animal the god himself or even his soul or double; the
Sukhos becomes <q>the gift of Sukhos,</q> separate from the
god, and bestowed by him upon man.
</p>

<p>
There were other nomes besides the Fayyûm in which
the crocodile was worshipped. It was the sacred animal
of Onuphis in the Delta, and of Ombos in the far south of
Egypt. But we must not expect to find a Sebek and a
sacred crocodile always accompanying one another. There
could be cases in which the crocodile was identified with
other gods than Sebek,&mdash;with Set, for example, as at Nubti,
near Dendera. The sacred animal existed before the god
whose incarnation he afterwards became. The neolithic
races were in the valley of the Nile before the Pharaonic
Egyptians, and the deities they adored were consequently
also there before the gods of the intruding race. Ptaḥ,
with his human figure, would not have been transformed
into the bull Apis if the bull had not been already in
possession.
</p>

<p>
The name of the god Thoth is itself a proof of this.
Thoth was the god of Hermopolis, the modern Eshmunên,
and his patronage of writing and books shows that he
must have been the deity of the Pharaonic race. The
god to whom the invention of the hieroglyphs was ascribed,
could not have been the god of an illiterate population.
</p>

<p>
Now the Egyptian form of the name Thoth is Deḥuti
(or Zeḥuti), <q>he who belongs to the ibis.</q><note place='foot'>Griffith (<hi rend='italic'>Proc. of Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, xxi. p. 278) has
recently proposed to see in Deḥuti a derivative from the name of the nome
Deḥut, like Anzti, the title of Osiris at Busiris, from the name of the
nome Anzet. But this is <q>putting the cart before the horse.</q> It was
not the nomes that were birds or men, but the deities worshipped in
them. Anz (perhaps from the Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>'az</foreign>, <q>the strong one</q>) meant
<q>king,</q> and represented the human Osiris.</note> Thoth, therefore,
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
was not originally the ibis, and, in spite of his bird's
head, the human body which he retained was a traditional
evidence of the fact. He was merely <q>attached to the
ibis,</q>&mdash;attached, that is to say, to the place where the ibis
was the fetish of the aborigines.
</p>

<p>
According to Manetho, it was not until the reign of
the second king of the Second Dynasty that Apis, Mnevis,
and Mendes <q>were adjudged to be gods.</q> This must
mean that it was then that the State religion admitted
for the first time that the official gods of Memphis, Heliopolis,
and Mendes were incarnated in the sacred animals
of the local cults. That the statement is historically
correct, may be gathered from the fact that the temples
of Memphis and Heliopolis were dedicated to Ptaḥ and
Tum, and not to Apis and Mnevis. When they were
built the divinity of the bull had not yet been officially
recognised. The gods in whose honour they were founded
were gods of human form, and gods of human form they
continued to be. Down to the last days of Egyptian
paganism the sun-god of Heliopolis was not a bull, but
a man; and though the mummified Apis watched over
the cemeteries of Memphis, the god of its great temple
remained a mummified man and not a mummified bull.
</p>

<p>
One of the legends elaborately concocted in the temples
out of old folk-tales and etymological puns explained
the animal forms of the gods as the result of the murder
of Osiris by Typhon or Set. The fear of sharing his fate
made them hide themselves, it was related, in the bodies
of the beasts.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De Iside et Osiride</hi>, ed. Leemans, lxxii. p. 126.</note> But the explanation must belong to an
age when the introduction of foreign ideas had thrown
discredit on the old worship of animals. In earlier
times no explanation was needed. The belief in the
power possessed by the soul of migrating from one body
into another, and the symbolism of which the hieroglyphic
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
writing was at once the expression and the cause, formed
an easy bridge by which the fetishism of neolithic Egypt
and the anthropomorphism of historical Egypt could be
joined together. Horus is a hawk and the Pharaoh is
a bull on the earliest monuments we possess, and such
visible symbols necessarily reacted on a people, one half
at least of whom already acknowledged the hawk and the
bull as their gods. The official recognition of Apis and
Mnevis and Mendes was the last step in the process of incorporating
the aboriginal superstitions and practices into
the State religion, and giving them official sanction. The
parallelism with Braḥmanism in India is complete.
</p>

<p>
But we have still to ask why it was that the bull was
worshipped in one district of prehistoric Egypt, the hawk
in another? Why was it that a particular fetish was
the protecting deity of a particular sanctuary or nome?
To this there can be but one answer. A modified form
of totemism must once have been known in the valley of
the Nile. The sacred animal must have been the last
representative of the totem of the tribe or clan. The
emblems borne on the flagstaffs of the prehistoric boats,
like the emblems on the standards of the several nomes,
must have been the animals or objects in which the
clans saw the divine powers which held them together,
and from which, it may be, they were derived. The
subsequent history of animal worship in Egypt is a continuous
drifting away from this primitive totemism. The
inanimate objects first fall into the background; then,
under the influence of a higher form of religion, the
animals become symbols, and assume semi-human shapes,
and finally one only out of a species is selected to become
the incarnation of a god. But the god of whom he is
the incarnation is a very different god from the divinity
that was believed to reside in the original fetish. It is a
god in the Asiatic and not in the African sense, a god
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
whose nature is spiritual and free from the limitations of
our earthly existence, so that he can enter at any moment
into whatsoever form he desires. The old fetishes survived,
indeed, but it was as amulets and charms; and to
these the multitude transferred its faith as the State
religion became more and more unintelligible to it. The
magic lock of hair and image of a serpent preserved at
Saft el-Henna, and said by the priests to have belonged
to the sun-god, had doubtless come down from the days
of fetishism.
</p>

<p>
It has often been asserted that besides the bull or the
ram or the crocodile, there were other creatures of a composite
or fabulous character which were also accounted
sacred by the Egyptians. It is true that the sacred
animal and symbol of Set seems to be of this nature.
His forked tail and ass-like ears make it difficult to
believe that any existing beast ever served for his
portrait. But the sphinx, in whom the men of the
Eighteenth Dynasty saw the image of Harmakhis, the
rising sun, or the phœnix in whom the sun-god of Heliopolis
was incarnated, belongs to a different category.
They are not sacred animals in the sense in which Apis
and Mnevis were so.
</p>

<p>
The sphinx, like the symbol of Set, is one of those
composite creatures which meet us from time to time in
Egyptian art. It has been said that such composite
creatures were as real to the Egyptian as the cattle and
sheep he tended in the fields; that he was quite as much
prepared to meet with them in the desert, as the ancient
Greek would have been to meet with a satyr in the
woods or a Highlander with a kelpie by the waterside.
Very possibly that was the case; it will not, however,
explain their origin, or the forms that were assigned to
them. Why, for instance, should the sphinx of Giza be
in the form of a lion with a human head?
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
Once more we must look to Asia for an explanation.
The sphinx of Giza was the guardian of the tombs of the
dead; it protected them from the spiritual foes whose
home was in the desert. <q>I protect thy sepulchral
chapel,</q> it is made to say in an inscription, <q>I watch
over thy sepulchral chamber, I keep away the stranger
who would enter, I overthrow the foe with their weapons,
I drive the wicked from thy tomb, I annihilate thy
opponents ... so that they return no more.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache</hi> (1880) p. 50.</note> The
sphinx, in fact, performed precisely the same office as the
winged bulls that guarded the entrance to an Assyrian
palace, or the cherubim who stood at the gates of the
garden of Eden.
</p>

<p>
The winged bulls and the cherubim were composite
creatures, and came originally from Babylonia. Babylonia
was the primal home, indeed, of all such animal combinations.
They were painted on the walls of the
temple of Bel at Babylon, and their existence formed
an essential part of the Babylonian cosmogony. That
cosmogony rested on the doctrine of a contest between
the powers of light and darkness, of order and chaos, and
on the final victory of the gods of light. There was a
world of chaos as well as a world of order; and before
the present creation could be evolved with its settled
laws and definite boundaries, there had been of necessity
another creation in which all things were confused and
chaotic. The brood of Tiamat, the dragon of chaos,
corresponded with the creatures of the actual world
which the gods of light had called into existence; they
were abortive attempts at creation, composed of limbs
which matched not together, <q>men with the body of
birds, or the faces of ravens.</q>
</p>

<p>
This brood of chaos were the demons who were the
enemies of Bel-Merodach and his followers. In order to
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
oppose them successfully, it was needful that there
should be similarly composite creatures, who, instead of
being on the side of evil, were under the orders of the
gods. By the side of the evil demon, therefore, there
was the <q>good cherub,</q> who protected the pious Babylonian,
and barred the way to the spirits of wickedness.
The winged bull with his human head defended the
approach to a temple or house; men with the bodies of
scorpions guarded the gateways of the sun.
</p>

<p>
This curious similarity in the functions assigned to the
images of composite animals both in Egypt and Babylonia,
raises the presumption that the composite forms themselves
were ultimately derived from a Babylonian source.
That such was the case we now have proof.
</p>

<p>
On the slate plaques and mace-heads of Nekhen and
Abydos we find composite forms similar to those of
Babylonia. What afterwards became the Hathor-headed
column appears as a human face with a cow's ears and
horns. Below are two monsters with a dog's body and a
lion's head, whose intertwined necks are snakes. What
makes the latter representation the more interesting is,
that M. Heuzey has pointed out exactly the same figures
on an early Babylonian seal now in the Louvre.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Rev. Archéologique</hi>, xxxiv. p. 291. On the seal-cylinder they are
accompanied by the lion-headed eagle of primitive Babylonian art. The
Egyptian figures are given in the <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache</hi>,
xxxvi. pl. xii.</note> Like
the seal-cylinder, therefore, which distinguishes the early
period of Egyptian history, the composite monsters of
which the sphinx and the symbol of Set were surviving
examples indicate direct communication with Chaldæa.
</p>

<p>
And, it must be remembered, it is only in Chaldæa
that they find their explanation. Here they originated
in the religious and cosmological ideas associated with
the physical features of the country. The sphinx of
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
Giza still guards the desert of Giza, because ages ago the
flooding waves of the Persian Gulf made the Babylonians
believe that the world had arisen out of a watery
chaos peopled by unformed creatures of monstrous
shape.
</p>

<p>
The case of the phœnix or <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> is somewhat different.
Here we have to do not with a fabulous monster, but
with an existing bird of which a fabulous story was told.
The bird was not an eagle, as Herodotos supposed, but a
heron, which at an early date seems to have been confounded
with the crested ibis, the symbol of the <foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign> or
luminous soul. It was, in fact, the spirit of the sun-god,
and later legends declared that it stood and sang on the
top of a tree at Heliopolis, while a flame burst forth
beside it, and the sun rose from the morning sky. With
sunset it became an Osiris, whose mummy was interred at
Heliopolis, to awake again to life with the first rays of
the rising sun. It was thus for Christian writers an
emblem of the resurrection, and as such its story is told
by St. Clement of Rome:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad Cor.</hi> 25.</note> <q>There is a certain bird which
is called the phœnix. This is the only one of its kind,
and it lives five hundred years. When the time of its
dissolution draws near that it must die, it builds itself a
nest of frankincense and myrrh and other spices, into
which, when the time is fulfilled, it enters and dies. But
as the flesh decays a certain kind of worm is produced,
which, being nourished by the juices of the dead bird,
brings forth feathers. Then, when it has acquired
strength, it takes up the nest in which are the bones of
its parent, and, bearing these, it passes from the land of
Arabia into Egypt, to the city called Heliopolis. And,
flying in open day in the sight of all men, it places them
on the altar of the sun, and, having done this, it hastens
back to its former abode. The priests then inspect the
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
chronological registers, and find that it has returned
exactly when the five hundredth year is completed.</q><note place='foot'>See also Herodotos, ii. 73; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>N. H.</hi> x. 2; Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>De Resurr.</hi>
13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The legend of the phœnix has grown up round the
belief that the disembodied soul could enter at will into
the body of a bird. The phœnix was allied to the hawk
of Horus, and probably was originally identical with that
primitive symbol of the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign>), the name of which
means literally <q>the luminous.</q> It will be remembered
that the Pyramid texts speak of the <q>four <foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign></q> or
<q>luminous souls of Horus</q> <q>who live in Heliopolis,</q>
and the sun-god of that city was usually invoked by his
<foreign rend='italic'>bau</foreign> or <q>souls,</q> figured as three birds which appear as
three ostriches on objects found in the tomb of Menes.<note place='foot'>De Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, ii. p. 165.</note>
On an early seal-cylinder of Babylonian type the <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign> is termed <q>the double of Horus.</q><note place='foot'>Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi>, Feb. 1898, No. 8. On a monument discovered
at Sân (Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Tanis</hi>, pt. ii. pl. x. 170), we read of <q>Horus in the
<foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> as a black bull,</q> <q>Horus in the <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> as a horned bull.</q> The
cemetery of Tanis was called <q>the city of the phœnix</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>). At
Edfu it is said that the phœnix (<foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>) <q>comes forth from the holy
heart</q> of Osiris.</note>
</p>

<p>
The story of the phœnix illustrates the influence
exercised by the pictorial character of Egyptian writing
upon the course of religious thought. The soul was
first symbolised by a bird. It passed out of the
corpse and into the air like a bird; it was free to
enter whatever body it chose, and the body of a bird
was that which it would naturally choose. Even to-day
the belief is not extinct in Europe that the spirits
of the dead pass into the forms of swallows or doves.
But at first it was immaterial what bird was selected
to express pictorially the idea of a soul. It was the
ostrich when the latter still existed in Southern Egypt;
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
then it became the plover, in consequence, probably, of a
similarity in sound between the name of the plover and
that of the soul. At other times the favourite symbol
was the crested ibis, whose name was identical with a
word that signified <q>light.</q> Around the conception of
the soul there accordingly gathered associations with the
light, and more especially with the light of the sun. The
sun-god, too, had a double and a soul; what could be
more fitting, therefore, than that they should be represented
by the crested ibis? It was but a step farther to
see in the bird an incarnation of the sun-god himself.
</p>

<p>
The subsequent development of the myth was due to
the fact that the god of Heliopolis continued to be depicted
as a man. His human form was too stereotyped
in religious art to be changed, and the phœnix consequently
was never actually identified with him. It was
his soul, but it was not Ra himself. The combination of
the man and the beast could be tolerated only when
both were co-ordinate survivals from a distant past.
The inner contradiction between the human and the
bestial god was then obscured or ignored.
</p>

<p>
With the human god was closely connected the
ancestor worship, which was quite as much a characteristic
of Egypt as the worship of animals. It was
due in the first instance, perhaps, to the belief that the
<foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> of the dead man needed food and nourishment, and
that if he did not receive them the hungry double would
revenge himself on the living. To this day the Egyptian
fellahin, both Moslem and Copt, visit the tombs of their
forefathers at certain times in the year, and, after eating
and drinking beside them, place a few grains of wheat or
some similar offering on a shelf in front of a window-like
opening into the tomb. But the belief in the
material needs of the <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> would not of itself have
sufficed to support the long lines of priests who were
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
attached to the cult of the dead, or the prayers that were
addressed to them. It was the deification of the Pharaoh
which caused <q>prophets</q> of Khufu and Khafra to be
still consecrated in the days of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty,<note place='foot'>On a stela in the Louvre a certain Psamtik, son of Uza-Hor, calls
himself prophet of Khufu, Khaf-Ra, and Dadef-Ra, as well as of Tanen,
Isis, and Harmakhis.</note>
and prevented the forms of the sacred animals from being
pictured on the temple walls. As long as there was a
human god on earth, there could also be a human god
in heaven; and in the Pyramid texts of the Sixth Dynasty
the dead Pepi or Teta is as much a god as any deity in
the pantheon.
</p>

<p>
When the Osirian faith had spread throughout Egypt,
and the pious Egyptian looked forward after death to
becoming himself an <q>Osiris,</q> there was still greater
reason for the divine honours that were paid to the
ancestor. In paying them to him the worshipper was
paying them to the god of the dead. And the god of
the dead was himself one of the ancestors of the Egyptian
people. He was a human god who had once ruled on
earth, and he still governed as a Pharaoh in the world
beyond the grave. As the Pharaoh was a theomorphic
man, so Osiris was an anthropomorphic god. In him
the cult of the ancestor reached its fullest development.
</p>

<p>
It was natural that Pharaonic Egypt should have been,
so far as we know, the birthplace of euhemerism. Where
the gods had human forms, and the men were gods, it
was inevitable that it should arise. The deification of
the Pharaoh prevented any line being drawn between
the living man and the deity he worshipped. As the
man could be a god, so too could the god be a man.
The gods of Egypt were accordingly transformed into
Pharaohs, who lived and conquered and died like the
Pharaohs of history. They differed from the men of to-day
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
only in having lived long ago, and on that account
being possessed of powers which are now lost. That
they should have died did not make them less divine
and immortal. The Pharaoh also died like the ancestors
who were worshipped at the tombs, but death meant
nothing more than passing into another form of existence.
It was merely a re-birth under new conditions.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> continued as before; there was no change in
outward shape or in the moral and intellectual powers.
</p>

<p>
In fact, the death of the god was a necessary accompaniment
of an anthropomorphic form of religion. In
Babylonia the temples of the gods were also their tombs,
and even among the Greeks the sepulchre of Zeus was
pointed out in Krete. The same cult was paid to the
dead Naram-Sin or the dead Gudea in Chaldæa that was
paid to the dead Khufu in Egypt. We have no need to
seek in any peculiarly Egyptian beliefs an explanation of
the ancestor worship which, along with the deification of
the king, it shared with Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
The euhemerism of the Egyptian priesthood sounded
the knell of the old faith. As the centuries passed,
purer and higher ideas of the Godhead had grown up,
and between the <q>formless</q> and eternal Creator of the
world and the man who had become a god, the distance
was too great to be spanned. On the one side, the gods
of the national creed had been resolved one into another,
till no distinctive shape or character was left to any one
of them; on the other side, they had been transformed
into mere human kings who had ruled over Egypt long
ago. The pantheistic Creator and the deified Egyptians
of vulgar and prosaic history could not be harmonised
together. The multitude might be content with its
sacred animals and its amulets, but the thinking portion
of the nation turned to Greek metaphysics or a despairing
scepticism. Already, in the time of the Eleventh
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
Dynasty, the poet who composed the dirge of king
Antef gives pathetic expression to his doubts<note place='foot'><p>The versification is Canon Rawnsley's, <hi rend='italic'>Notes for the Nile</hi>, pp. 188, 189.
Professor Erman's literal translation is as follows (<hi rend='italic'>Life in Ancient Egypt</hi>,
Eng. tr., pp. 386, 387)&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>I heard the words of Imhotep and Har-dad-ef,<lb/>
Who both speak thus in their sayings:<lb/>
<q>Behold the dwellings of those men, their walls fall down,<lb/>
Their place is no more,<lb/>
They are as though they had never existed.</q><lb/>
No one comes from thence to tell us what is become of them,<lb/>
Who tells us how it goes with them, who nerves our hearts,<lb/>
Until you yourselves approach the place whither they are gone.<lb/>
With joyful heart forget not to glorify thyself<lb/>
And follow thy heart's desire, so long as thou livest.<lb/>
Put myrrh on thy head, clothe thyself in fine linen,<lb/>
Anointing thyself with the marvellous things of God.<lb/>
Adorn thyself as beautifully as thou canst,<lb/>
And let not thy heart be discouraged.<lb/>
Follow thy heart's desire and thy pleasures<lb/>
As long as thou livest on earth.<lb/>
Follow thy heart's desire and thy pleasures<lb/>
Till there comes to thee the day of mourning.<lb/>
Yet he, whose heart is at rest, hears not their complaint,<lb/>
And he who lies in the tomb understands not their mourning.<lb/>
With beaming face keep holiday to-day,<lb/>
And rest not therein.<lb/>
For none carries his goods away with him,<lb/>
Yea, none returns again, who has journeyed thither.</q>
</p></note>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>What is fortune? say the wise.</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vanished are the hearths and homes,</l>
<l>What he does or thinks, who dies,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>None to tell us comes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Have thy heart's desire, be glad,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Use the ointment while you live;</l>
<l>Be in gold and linen clad,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Take what gods may give.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>For the day shall come to each</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When earth's voices sound no more;</l>
<l>Dead men hear no mourners' speech,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tears can not restore.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Eat and drink in peace to-day,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When you go, your goods remain;</l>
<l>He who fares the last long way</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Comes not back again.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Still more hopeless are the words put into the mouth of
the wife of the high priest of Memphis at the close of
the first century before our era&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>O my brother, my spouse, and my friend,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>High priest of Memphis!</l>
<l>Cease not to drink and to eat,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To fill thyself with wine, and to make sweet love;</l>
<l>Enjoy each festive day and follow thy desire,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Let not care enter thy heart</l>
<l>All the years that on earth thou remainest.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The underworld is a land of thick darkness,</l>
<l>A sorrowful place for the dead.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They sleep, after their guise, never to awaken</l>
<l>And behold their comrades.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their father and their mother they know not,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>No yearning for their wives and their children do they feel.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch's translation (<hi rend='italic'>Die Aegyptologie</hi>, i. p. 163).</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VI. The Gods Of Egypt.</head>

<p>
In the language of ancient Egypt the word <foreign rend='italic'>neter</foreign> signified
<q>a god.</q> Sir P. le Page Renouf endeavoured to
show that the word originally meant <q>strong,</q> and that
the first Egyptians accordingly pictured their gods as
embodiments of strength.<note place='foot'>Hibbert Lectures on the <hi rend='italic'>Religion of Ancient Egypt</hi> (1879), pp. 93-100.</note> But it has been pointed
out<note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Aegyptologie</hi>, p. 167.</note> that where <foreign rend='italic'>neter</foreign> is used in the sense of <q>strong,</q>
it is rather the lustiness of youth that is meant, and
that a better rendering would be <q>fresh and vigorous.</q>
The verb <foreign rend='italic'>neter</foreign> signifies <q>to flourish</q> and <q>grow up.</q>
Moreover, it is a question whether between this verb
and the word for <q>god</q> there is any connection at all.
It is difficult to understand how the gods could be
described as <q>growths</q> unless they were conceived of
as plants; and of this there is no evidence in ancient
Egypt. We must be content with the fact that as far
back as we can trace the history of the word <foreign rend='italic'>neter</foreign>, it
meant <q>god</q> and <q>god</q> only.
</p>

<p>
But we must also beware of supposing that the
Egyptians attached the same ideas to it that we do, or
that it had the same connotation at all periods of their
history or among all classes of the people. The pantheistic
deity of Khu-n-Aten was a very different being
from the sun-god of whom the Pharaohs of the Fifth
Dynasty had called themselves the sons, and between
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
the divinity which the multitude saw in the bull Apis
and the formless and ever-living Creator of the priesthood
there was a gulf which could hardly be bridged.
But even the conception of the Creator formed by the
priesthood is difficult for us to realise. Eighteen centuries
of Christianity have left their impress upon us,
and we start from a different background of ideas from
that of the Egyptian, to whatever class he may have
belonged. It is impossible that we can enter exactly
into what the Egyptian meant by such expressions as
<q>living for ever</q> or <q>having no form</q>; even the words
<q>life</q> and <q>form</q> would not have had the same connotation
for him that they have for us. All that we
can do is to approximate to the meaning that he gave
to them, remembering that our translation of them into
the language of to-day can be approximative only.
</p>

<p>
The hieroglyphic writing which preserved memories
of a time that the Egyptians themselves had forgotten,
represents the idea of a <q>god</q> by the picture of an axe.
The axe seems originally to have consisted of a sharpened
flint or blade of metal hafted in a wooden handle, which
was occasionally wrapped in strips of red, white, and black
cloth.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Beni-Hasan</hi>, pt. iii. (<hi rend='italic'>Archæological Survey of Egypt</hi>), pl. v. fig.
75.</note> It takes us back to an age of fetishism, when
inanimate objects were looked upon as divine, and perhaps
reflects the impression made upon the natives of the country
by the Pharaonic Egyptians with their weapons of metal.
Horus of Edfu, it will be remembered, was served by
smiths, and the shrines he founded to commemorate his
conquest of Egypt were known as <q>the smithies.</q> The
double-headed axe was a divine symbol in Asia Minor,<note place='foot'>The double-headed axe is carved repeatedly on the walls of the
<q>palace of Minos,</q> discovered by Dr. A. J. Evans at Knossos, and seems to
have been the divine symbol which was believed to protect the building
from injury. On the coins of Tarsus the sun-god Sandan carries an axe.</note>
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
and both in the old world and in the new the fetish
was wrapped in cloths. Even at Delphi a sacred stone
was enveloped in wool on days of festival.
</p>

<p>
In the sacred axe, therefore, which denoted a god,
we may see a parallel to the standards on the prow of
the prehistoric boat or to the symbols of the nomes. It
would have represented the gods of those invaders of
the valley of the Nile who brought with them weapons
of copper, and have been the symbol of the conquering
race and the deities it worshipped. As the Pharaonic
Egyptians appropriated the fetishes of the older population
in their sculptures and their picture-writing, so too
would they have appropriated what had become to the
neolithic people the sign and emblem of superior power.
</p>

<p>
We have already dealt with an important class of
gods, those which had a solar origin. There were other
gods of an elemental character, whose worship does not
seem to have been originally confined to one particular
locality. Such were Seb, the earth, Nut, the sky, and
Nu, the primeval deep. But they played only a small
part in the religion of the country. Seb was known in
later days chiefly as the father of Osiris; at an earlier
epoch he had been the <foreign rend='italic'>rpâ</foreign>, or <q>hereditary prince, of the
gods,</q> a title which takes us back to the feudal period of
Egypt, when as yet there was no Pharaoh who ruled over the
whole of the land. The animal sacred to him was the goose,
perhaps on account of some similarity in its name; but
he was never identified with it, and continued to the last
to be depicted in human form. His symbol, however,
gave rise to a cosmological myth. The goose became the
mother of the egg out of which the universe was born.
</p>

<p>
Nut was the wife of Seb, wedded to him as the sky is
wedded to the earth. It seems reasonable to see in her
the feminine form of Nu, the primeval chaos of waters;
and so the Egyptians of the historical period believed,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
since they identified her with the wife of the Nile, and
represented her as sitting in the sycamore and pouring
the water of life on the hands of a soul at the foot of
the tree. It has been suggested, however, that Nu was
of later origin than Nut, who became a Nile goddess
with the head of a snake only when Nu himself had been
changed into the Nile.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</note> But the idea of a watery chaos
is not one which would have grown up on Egyptian soil.
There it was rather the desert which represented the unformed
beginning of things; the Nile spread itself over
the already existing land at regular intervals, and was
no dreary waste of waters, out of which the earth
emerged for the first time. The geographical home of
the idea was in Babylonia, on the shores of the ever-retreating
Persian Gulf. And from Babylonia we find
that the belief in a primeval deep spread itself over
Western Asia. The Egyptian Nu is the counterpart of
the Babylonian Mummu, the mother of gods, as Nu was
their father. Professor Hommel may even be right in
identifying the name with the Babylonian Nun or Nunu,
the lord of the deep.
</p>

<p>
But Nu survived only in the theological schools, more
especially in that of Hermopolis, the modern Eshmunên.
The god of Hermopolis was Thoth, the Egyptian Deḥuti.
Thoth seems to have been at the outset the moon, which
was thus, as in Babylonia, of the male sex. A legend,
repeated by Plutarch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Isid.</hi> 12.</note> relates how he gained the five
intercalatory days of the Egyptian year by playing at
dice with the moon; and he was at times identified with
the moon-gods Aah and Khonsu. The first month of
the year was his, and he was the measurer of time, who
had invented arithmetic and geometry, music and astronomy,
architecture and letters. He knew the magic
formulæ which could bind the gods themselves, and as
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
minister of the Pharaoh Thamos had introduced writing
and literature into Egypt. Henceforward he remained the
patron of books and education, on which the culture of Egypt
so largely rested. He was, in fact, the culture-god of the
Egyptians to whom the elements of civilisation were due.
</p>

<p>
It is curious that we do not know his true name, for
Deḥuti means merely the god <q>who is attached to the
ibis.</q> Was it really Nu? and is Thoth really a compound
of a moon-god and a sun-god? At all events
the culture-god of Babylonia who corresponded to Thoth
was Ea, the deep, and one of the earliest names of Ea
was <q>the god Nun.</q> Moreover, the son of Ea was
Asari, the Osiris of Egypt; and just as Asari instructed
mankind in the wisdom and laws of Ea, so Thoth acted
as the minister of Osiris and adjudged his cause against
Seb. Like Ea, too, Thoth wrote the first books from
which men derived their laws.<note place='foot'>As Thoth writes the name of the king upon the sacred sycamore in
order to ensure him everlasting life, so the name of Ea is written upon
the core of the sacred cedar-tree (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 15, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> 10-13); Sayce,
Hibbert Lectures on the <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Babylonians</hi>, p. 240.</note>
</p>

<p>
However this may be, Thoth was the creator of the
world through the word of his mouth. In the cosmogony
of Hermopolis the universe and the gods that direct it
are the creation of his word, which later ages refined
into the sound of his voice. From Hermopolis the
doctrine passed to other parts of Egypt, and under the
Theban dynasties tended to displace or absorb the older
Heliopolitan doctrine of creation by generation. But
the doctrine was known also in Babylonia, where the
god whose word is creative was Asari, the Merodach
of the Semites. In the Babylonian Epic of the Creation
the <q>word</q> of Merodach creates and destroys, like the
<q>word</q> of Yahweh in the Old Testament. I must leave
to another lecture the consideration as to how far the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
Logos of Alexandrine philosophy has been influenced by
the theology of Hermopolis.
</p>

<p>
Whether Thoth were originally Nu or not, Nu at all
events forms the second member of the Hermopolitan
Ennead. Professor Maspero has shown that it was
modelled on the Ennead of Heliopolis.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. pp. 381-385.</note> But in accordance
with the more abstract character of the cosmogony
of which it was a part, the divinities of which it is composed
are abstractions that look strangely out of place in
the Egyptian Pantheon.
</p>

<p>
Nu is provided with the feminine Nut, who is not
to be confounded with the old goddess of the sky, and
from them are derived the successive pairs Ḥeḥui and
Ḥeḥet, Kek and Keket, Nini and Ninit, <q>eternity,</q>
<q>darkness,</q> and <q>inertia.</q><note place='foot'>This is Brugsch's translation (<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie der alten
Aegypter</hi>, p. 123 sqq.); but the meaning of the last name is doubtful,
and the first is rather <q>time</q> than <q>eternity.</q></note> The whole scheme is
Asiatic rather than Egyptian, but the gods composing
it are already mentioned in the Pyramid texts.
</p>

<p>
The four pairs of abstract deities constituted <q>the
eight</q> gods after whom Hermopolis received one of its
names (Khmunu, now Ashmunên), and who were often
addressed as <q>the god eight,</q> like <q>the god seven</q> in
Babylonia. Professor Maspero sees in them a philosophical
development of the four cynocephalous apes
who accompanied Thoth and saluted the first streak of
dawn. But the development is difficult to follow, and
the apes who are the companions of the god probably
had another origin. They certainly must have come
from the Sudân; no apes were indigenous in Egypt in
historical times. Moreover, it was only the Thoth of
Hermopolis in Upper Egypt in whose train they
were found; the Thoth of Hermopolis Parva in the
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
Delta, properly speaking, knew them not. But from
an early epoch <q>the five gods</q>&mdash;Thoth and his four
ape-followers, whose likeness he sometimes adopted&mdash;had
been worshipped at Eshmunên. Its temple was
called <q>the Abode of the Five,</q> and its high priest
<q>the great one of the House of the Five.</q><note place='foot'>See Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, ii. pp. 257 sqq. and
375 sqq. In an inscription discovered by Professor Petrie in the tombs
of the first two dynasties at Abydos, Thoth is represented as a seated ape
(<hi rend='italic'>The Royal Tombs of Abydos</hi>, pt. i. pl. xvii. 26). On the other hand,
on the broken Abydos slate figured in de Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les
Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, pl. ii., which is probably prehistoric, Thoth appears
as an ibis.</note>
</p>

<p>
How the half-human apes of Central Africa came to
be associated with Thoth we do not know. Between the
baboons who sing hymns to the rising and setting sun
and the moon, or the culture-god, there is little or no
connection. But a curious biography found in a tomb at
Assuan throws light upon it. Herkhuf, the subject of
the biography, was sent by Hor-em-saf of the Sixth
Dynasty on an exploring expedition into the Libyan
desert south of the First Cataract, and he brought back
with him a Danga dwarf <q>who danced the dances of the
god,</q> like another Danga dwarf brought from Punt in
the neighbourhood of Suâkim or Massawa in the time of
the Fifth Dynasty. The dwarf was evidently regarded by
Herkhuf as a species of baboon, if we may judge from
the account he gives of the way in which he was treated;
even to-day the ape in the zoological gardens of Giza is
called by the lower classes at Cairo <q>the savage man.</q>
Travellers have described the dancing and screaming of
troops of apes at daybreak when the sun first lights up
the earth, and it was natural for primitive man to suppose
that the dancing was in honour of the return of the
god of day. Dances in honour of the gods have been
common all over the world; indeed, among barbarous
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
and savage peoples the dance is essentially of a religious
character. Even David danced before the ark, and boys
still dance before the high altar in the cathedral of
Seville. That dances are represented on the prehistoric
pottery of Egypt, has been pointed out by M. de Morgan;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, p. 65.</note>
and since the Danga dwarf came from the half-mythical
country in the south which was known to the Egyptians
as <q>the land of the gods,</q> and where, too, the apes of
Thoth had their home, it was reasonable to believe that
he knew the dance that would be pleasing to the gods.<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, p. 429 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
I believe, therefore, that the apes of Thoth were at the
outset the dwarf-like apes or ape-like dwarfs who danced
in his honour in the temple of Hermopolis. Gradually
they were taken hold of by that symbolism which was
inseparable from a religion so intimately bound up with
a pictorial system of writing; from dancers they became
the followers of the god, who sang to the rising and
setting sun the hymns which Thoth had composed. But
this would have been when the worship of the sun-god
of Heliopolis had already spread to Hermopolis, and the
cult of Thoth was mingling with that of Ra. The mutual
influence of the theories of creation taught by the priests
of the two cities shows at what a comparatively early
date this would have happened.
</p>

<p>
It is possible that there was actually a connection
between the four baboons and the four elemental gods of
Hermopolitan theology. But it was not in the way of
development. It was rather that as the gods were four
in number, the dancers in their temple were four also.
To each god, as it were, an ape was assigned.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Hermopolis belongs to the pre-Menic
age of Egypt; we can hardly any longer call it prehistoric.
So, too, does the influence of Nekhen, once
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
the capital of the kingdom of Upper Egypt. In a former
lecture I have already spoken of its vulture-headed
goddess Nekheb, the consort of the hawk Horus, whose
temple at El-Kab guarded the outlet of the road from
the Red Sea, and who was known as Mut, <q>the mother,</q>
at Thebes. She was, in fact, the goddess of all Upper
Egypt, whose worship had spread over it in the days
when Nekhen was its ruling city. The gods of the
Pharaoh followed the extension of his power.
</p>

<p>
In the early inscriptions of the First Cataract the
vulture-headed goddess sitting on her basket is identified
with the local divinity Sati (more correctly Suti), <q>the
Asiatic.</q> From her the island of Sehêl received its
name, and there her sanctuary stood before Isis of Philæ
ousted her from her supremacy. She was symbolised by
the arrow, the name of which was the same as that of
the goddess, and which was, moreover, a fitting emblem
of the hostile tribes of the desert. It already appears
on the prehistoric pottery as a sacred fetish on the
<q>flagstaff</q> or standard at the prow of the boat.
</p>

<p>
The name of Sati, or rather Suti, is remarkable. It
was not only the name of the goddess of the First
Cataract, it was also the name given by the Egyptians
to the nomadic tribes of Asia. But it was not the
Egyptians only who used it in this sense. From time
immemorial the name Sutê had precisely the same meaning
among the Babylonians. The fact cannot be accidental;
and as Sutê is of Babylonian origin, we have in it
a fresh proof of the relations of the Pharaonic Egyptians
with primeval Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
But the goddess Sati does not stand alone. There was
also a god Set (or Sut), the twin-brother and enemy of
Osiris, and, like Esau in Hebrew history, a representative
of the desert; while at the Cataract another goddess,
Ânuqet by name, is her companion. Now Ânuqet is the
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
feminine of Ânuq, the Ânaq of the Old Testament. The
foreign nature of Ânuqet has long been recognised, for
she wears on her head the non-Egyptian head-dress of a
cap fringed with feathers. It is the same head-dress as
that worn by the god Bes, whom the Egyptians derived
from the land of Punt on the shores of the Red Sea. A
similar cap is worn by the Zakkal on the coast of Palestine,
in the near neighbourhood of <q>the sons of Ânaq,</q>
as well as by the Babylonian king Merodach-nadin-akhi,
on a monument now in the British Museum.<note place='foot'>The same cap is worn by the god who sits behind a scorpion-man on a
stone containing a grant of land by the Babylonian king Nebuchadrezzar <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1100). The stone was found at Abu-Habba, and is now in the British
Museum (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 57).</note> Everything,
therefore, points to its having been an Asiatic characteristic;
perhaps it was made of the ostrich feathers which
are still collected in Arabia and even on the eastern side
of the Jordan.
</p>

<p>
The Greeks identified Ânuqet with Hestia, and Sati
with Hêra. This was probably because Sati was the
wife of Khnum (or Kneph), the god of the Cataract. As
such Sati was also known as Heket, <q>the frog,</q> which
was supposed to be born from the mud left by the inundation
of the Nile. It thus became a symbol of the
resurrection, and was consequently adopted by the Christians
of Egypt. Hence the frequency with which it is
represented on lamps of the late Roman period.
</p>

<p>
Khnum, like the god of Thebes, was a ram, and is
accordingly usually depicted with a ram's head. But he
could not originally have been so. Once more the old
fetish of the district, the sacred animal of the nome, must
have been fused with the god whom the Pharaonic
invaders brought with them. For Khnum was a potter,
as his name signifies, and at Philæ it is said of him that
he was <q>the moulder (<foreign rend='italic'>khnum</foreign>) of men, the modeller of
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
the gods.</q><note place='foot'>Maspero (<hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 157) reproduces a picture in the
temple of Luxor representing Khnum moulding Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and his
<foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> on a potter's table.</note> Hence he is called <q>the creator of all this,
the fashioner of that which exists, the father of fathers,
the mother of mothers,</q> <q>the creator of the heaven and
the earth, the lower world, the water and the mountains,</q>
<q>who has formed the male and female of fowl and fish,
wild beasts, cattle, and creeping things.</q>
</p>

<p>
In Babylonia, Ea, the culture-god and creator, was also
termed the <q>potter,</q> and it was thus that he moulded
the gods as well as men.<note place='foot'>See Scheil, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xx. p. 124 sqq.</note> At the same time, like
Khnum, he was a god of the waters. While the Cataract
of the Nile was the home of Khnum, the Persian Gulf
was the dwelling-place of Ea. The connection between
the water and the modeller in clay is obvious. It is
only where the water inundates the soil and leaves the
moist clay behind it that the art of the potter can
flourish.<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>khnum</foreign> or <q>pot</q> is often used to express the name of Khnum in
the hieroglyphics. It reminds us of the vase on early Babylonian seal-cylinders
from the two sides of which flow the rivers Tigris and Euphrates,
and which is often held in the hands of the water-god Ea. The design is
reproduced with modifications on early Syrian cylinders, and the name of
the zodiacal sign Aquarius shows to what an antiquity it must reach back.
The primitive Egyptians believed that the Nile issued from a grotto to
which the <foreign rend='italic'>qerti</foreign> or <q>two gulfs</q> of the Cataract gave access (Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, pp. 19, 38, 39), and Khnum was the god of the
Cataract. Perhaps the classical representation of the Tiber and other
rivers holding urns from which a stream of water flows is derived from
Egypt.</note>
</p>

<p>
But was there also a connection between the Babylonian
god who was worshipped in the ancient seaport
of Chaldæa and the god of the Egyptian Cataract? We
have seen that the wife of Khnum was entitled <q>the
Asiatic,</q> the very form of the name being Babylonian.
We have further seen that her companion Ânuqet was also
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
from Asia, and that her traditional head-dress preserved
a memory of the fact. There is a road from the Red
Sea to Assuan as well as to El-Kab; it may be that it
goes back to those prehistoric times when the Pharaonic
Egyptians made their way across the desert into the
valley of the Nile, as their Semitic kinsfolk did in later
days into the tablelands of Abyssinia.
</p>

<p>
The creator who was worshipped at Memphis, at the
other end of the Nile valley, was a potter also.<note place='foot'>Men-nofer (Memphis), <q>the good place,</q> is the equivalent of the name
of the ancient seaport of Babylonia, Eridu, the Sumerian Eri-duga or
<q>good city.</q> Ea, the culture-god and creator, was the god of Eridu.
In the Deluge tablet (l. 9) Ea says that he had not <q>opened (<foreign rend='italic'>patû</foreign>) the
oracle of the great gods.</q> It is hardly worth while to mention that the
antiquity of Memphis has been disputed by some philologists.</note> This
was Ptaḥ, whose name is derived from a root which
means to <q>open.</q> According to Porphyry, he had sprung
from an egg which had come from the mouth of Kneph.
But the reference in the name is probably to the ceremony
of <q>opening the mouth</q> of a mummy, or the
statue of the dead man with a chisel, a finger, or some
red pebbles, in order to confer upon it the capability of
receiving the breath of life, and of harbouring the double
or the soul.<note place='foot'>Ptaḥ is stated in the Book of the Dead to have been the original author
of the ceremony which he first performed on the dead gods.</note> Ptaḥ was represented as a mummy; he
was, in fact, one of the gods of the underworld, who, like
Osiris or the mummified Horus of Nekhen, had their
tombs as well as their temples. He must have been the
creative potter, however, before he became a mummy.
Perhaps his transformation dates from the period of his
fusion with Sokaris, who seems to have been the god of
the cemetery of Memphis.<note place='foot'>This is Maspero's view (<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, ii. pp.
21, 22). Wiedemann (<hi rend='italic'>Religion der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 75) makes Sokaris a
sun-god; but his solar attributes belong to the time when he was identified
with Ra of Heliopolis.</note> At any rate, Ptaḥ and
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
Khnum are alike forms of the same primitive deity, and
the names they bear are epithets merely. At Philæ,
Ptaḥ is pictured as about to model man out of a lump of
clay, and the Khnumu, or <q>creators</q> who helped him to
fashion the world, were his children.<note place='foot'>It was only when the sun-god had absorbed the other deities that they
became the children of Ra.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Khnumu are the Patæki of Herodotos (iii. 37),
whose figures, the Greek writer tells us, were carved by
the Phœnicians on the prows of their vessels, probably
to ward off the evil eye. They were dwarfs, like the
Danga dwarf of Herkhuf or the god Bes, with thick
heads, bowed legs, long arms, and bushy beards; and their
terra-cotta figures have often been met with in the tombs.
From the name Patæki we might infer that they had
been borrowed by the Phœnicians from Egypt. But it
is also possible that both Egypt and Phœnicia derived
them from the same source. Dr. Scheil has pointed out
that a similar figure occurs on early Babylonian seal-cylinders,
where its Sumerian name is given as <q>the god
Nugidda</q> or <q>the Dwarf,</q> and it is sometimes represented
as dancing before the goddess Istar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xix. pp. 50, 54.</note> Thus far, however,
no text has been discovered which associates the god
Nugidda with the creator of the world.
</p>

<p>
When Memphis became the capital of Egypt and the
seat of the Pharaoh, its god also became supreme in the
Egyptian pantheon. But he was no longer Ptaḥ the
creator simply. He was already amalgamated with
Sokaris, and probably with Osiris as well. It was not
difficult to identify two mummified gods whose domain
was among the dead. With the spread of the sun-worship
of Heliopolis and the spirit of pantheistic syncretism
which accompanied it, the individuality of the
old god of Memphis became still further lost. He was
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
merged into Tanen or Tatunen, a local god of the earth,
as well as into Ra. He had already been made into the
chief of an Ennead, and now the Ennead was resolved
into a trinity. Nofer-Tum, <q>beautified by Tum,</q> was
brought from Heliopolis, and was made into a son of
Ptaḥ, afterwards to be superseded, however, by another
abstraction, Im-hotep, <q>he who comes in peace.</q><note place='foot'>To <q>come in peace</q> is still a common expression in Egyptian Arabic,
and means <q>to return safely.</q> The name seems to be taken from the
office of Im-hotep, which was to conduct the dead safely back to a second
life.</note> Im-hotep
was reputed the first <foreign rend='italic'>kher-heb</foreign> or hierophant; he
it was who recited and interpreted the liturgy of the
dead and the magic formulæ which restored health to
the sick and raised the dead to life. The Greeks consequently
identified him with Asklêpios.<note place='foot'>Nofer-Tum and Im-hotep had human forms like their father. The
first is a man with a lotus flower on the head, the second a youth with a
papyrus roll on the knee.</note> Both Im-hotep
and Nofer-Tum were the sons of Sekhet, the lion-headed
goddess of Letopolis, from whence she must have been
borrowed by the Memphite priests when the ancient
potter god had become a generator, and a wife was needed
for him.
</p>

<p>
With the decline of the Memphite dynasties and the
fall of the Old Empire, the commanding part played by
Ptaḥ in the Egyptian pantheon was at an end. The god
of the imperial city had been identified with the gods of
the provincial nomes; his temple at Memphis had taken
precedence of all others, and the local priesthoods were
content that their deities should have found a shelter in
it as forms of Ptaḥ. He was even identified with Ḥâpi,
the Nile, though perhaps the similarity in sound between
the sacred name of the river and that of the bull Apis
(Ḥapi) may have assisted in the identification.<note place='foot'>There was a difference only in the vowel of the first syllable.</note>
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
That the Nile should have been worshipped throughout
the land of Egypt is natural. The very land itself was
his gift, the crops that grew upon it and the population
it supported all depended upon his bounty. When the
Nile failed, the people starved; when the Nile was full,
Egypt was a land of contentment and plenty. It is
only wonderful that the cult of the Nile should not have
been more prominent than it was. The temples built in
its honour were neither numerous nor important, nor
were its priests endowed as the priests of other gods.
But the cause of this is explained by history. The
neolithic population of the country lived in the desert;
the Nile was for them little more than the creator of
pestilential swamps and dangerous jungles, where wild
beasts and venomous serpents lurked for the intruder.
The Pharaonic Egyptians brought their own gods with
them, and these naturally became the divinities of the
nomes. When the river had been embanked and its
waters been made a blessing instead of a curse, the sacred
animals and the gods of the nomes were too firmly
established to be displaced.<note place='foot'>The Nile-gods, representing the Nile and the canals, are depicted as
stout men with large breasts, crowned with flowers, and wearing only the
narrow girdle of prehistoric Egypt. The human form agrees well with
the fact that the Nile was first engineered, and so made a source of life
for Egypt, by the Pharaonic Egyptians. Babylonia was the country, it
must be remembered, where river engineering and irrigation were originally
developed.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the backwardness of the State religion was made
up for by the piety of individuals. Hymns to the Nile,
like those which were engraved on the rocks of Silsilis
by Meneptah and Ramses <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, breathe a spirit of gratitude
and devotion which can hardly be exceeded&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Hail to thee, O Nile!</q></l>
<l>who manifestest thyself over this land,</l>
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
<l>and comest to give life to Egypt!</l>
<l>Mysterious is thy issuing forth from darkness,</l>
<l>on this day whereon it is celebrated!</l>
<l>Watering the orchards created by Ra</l>
<l>to cause all cattle to drink,</l>
<l>thou givest the earth to drink, inexhaustible one!...</l>
<l>Lord of the fish, during the inundation,</l>
<l>no bird alights on the crops.</l>
<l>Thou createst the wheat, thou bringest forth the barley,</l>
<l>assuring perpetuity to the temples.</l>
<l>If thou ceasest thy toil and thy work,</l>
<l>then all that exists is in anguish.</l>
<l>If the gods suffer in heaven,</l>
<l>then the faces of men waste away....</l>
<l>No dwelling (is there) which may contain thee!</l>
<l>None penetrates within thy heart!</l>
<l>Thy young men, thy children, applaud thee</l>
<l>and render unto thee royal homage.</l>
<l>Stable are thy decrees for Egypt</l>
<l>before thy servants of the north.</l>
<l>He dries the tears from all eyes,</l>
<l>and guards the increase of his good things....</l>
<l>Establisher of justice, mankind desires thee,</l>
<l>supplicating thee to answer their prayers;</l>
<l>thou answerest them by the inundation!</l>
<l>Men offer thee the first-fruits of corn;</l>
<l>all the gods adore thee!...</l>
<l>A festal song is raised for thee on the harp,</l>
<l>with the accompaniment of the hand.</l>
<l>Thy young men and thy children acclaim thee,</l>
<l>and prepare their exercises.</l>
<l>Thou art the august ornament of the earth,</l>
<l>letting thy bark advance before men,</l>
<l>lifting up the heart of women in labour,</l>
<l>and loving the multitude of the flocks.</l>
<l>When thou shinest in the royal city,</l>
<l>the rich man is sated with good things,</l>
<l>even the poor man disdains the lotus;</l>
<l>all that is produced is of the choicest;</l>
<l>all plants exist for thy children.</l>
<l>If thou refusest nourishment,</l>
<l>the dwelling is silent, devoid of all that is good,</l>
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
<l>the country falls exhausted ...</l>
<l>O Nile, come (and) prosper!</l>
<l>O thou that makest men to live through his flocks,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>and his flocks through his orchards!</q><note place='foot'><q>Hymn to the Nile,</q> translated by P. Guieysse, <hi rend='italic'>Records of the Past</hi>,
new series, iii. p. 46 sqq. The hymn was composed by Anna or Annana
in the time of Meneptah <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The supremacy of Memphis was replaced by that of
Thebes, and under the Theban dynasties, accordingly,
Amon, the god of Thebes, became paramount in the State
religion of Egypt. But before we trace the history of
his rise to supremacy, it is necessary to say a few words
regarding the Egyptian goddesses. The woman occupied
an important position in the Egyptian household; purity
of blood was traced through her, and she even sat on the
throne of the Pharaohs. The divine family naturally
corresponded to the family on earth. The Egyptian
goddess was not always a pale reflection of the god, like
the Semitic consort of Baal; on the contrary, there were
goddesses of nomes as well as gods of nomes, and the
nome-goddess was on precisely the same footing as the
nome-god. Nit of Sais or Hathor of Dendera differed in
no way, so far as their divine powers were concerned,
from Ptaḥ of Memphis or Khnum of the Cataract. Like
the gods, too, they became the heads of Enneads, or were
embodied in Trinities, when first the doctrine of the
Ennead, and then that of the Trinity, made its way
through the theological schools. They are each even
called <q>the father of fathers</q> as well as <q>the mother of
mothers,</q> and take the place of Tum as the creators of
heaven and earth.<note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie</hi>, pp. 3, 248, 348.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nit rose to eminence with the Twenty-sixth Dynasty.
Her city of Sais had previously played no part in history,
but both its goddess and its sanctuary were of old
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
date.<note place='foot'>Her name is already mentioned in the Pyramid texts, and in <hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> ii.
131 she is described as the eye of Horus and <q>the opener of the paths,</q>
the ordinary title of Anubis as god of the dead.</note> Of the nature of the goddess, however, we know
little. She is represented as a woman with a shuttle as
her emblem, and in her hands she carries a bow and
arrow, like Istar of Assyria or Artemis of Greece. But
the twin arrow was also a symbol of the nome, which
was a border district, exposed to the attacks of the
Libyan tribes. The Greeks identified her with their
Athêna on account of a slight similarity in the names.
</p>

<p>
Sekhet, or Bast of Bubastis, is better known. Sometimes
she has the head of a lion, sometimes of a cat.
At Philæ it is said of her that <q>she is savage as Sekhet
and mild as Bast.</q><note place='foot'>In the Speos Artermidos near Beni-Hassan, where a large cemetery of
mummified cats has been found, she is called Pakht, an older form of Bast.</note> But the lion must have preceded
the cat. The earlier inhabitants of the valley of the
Nile were acquainted with the lion; the cat seems to
have been introduced from Nubia in the age of the
Eleventh Dynasty. In the time of the Old Empire
there was no cat-headed deity, for there were no cats.
But the cat, when once introduced, was from the outset
a sacred animal.<note place='foot'>On a slab discovered by Professor Petrie at Koptos, Usertesen <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>
of the Twelfth Dynasty already appears standing before a cat-headed
goddess who is called <q>Bast, the lady of Shel.</q> Shel is perhaps Ashel
at Karnak, where the temple of Mut stood, in which so many figures of
Bast or Sekhet have been found (Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Koptos</hi>, pl. x. 2). The name
of Bast also occurs in the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 290); but here it is an
epithet of Uazit, the goddess of Dep or Buto, once the capital of the
kingdom of Northern Egypt, who is contrasted with the goddess of Nekheb.</note> The lion of Sekhet was transformed
into a cat; and as the centuries passed, the petted and
domesticated animal was the object of a worship that
became fanatical. Herodotos maintains that when a
house took fire the Egyptians of his time thought only
of preserving the cats; and to this day the cat is
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
honoured above all other animals on the banks of the
Nile. The chief sanctuary of Bast was at Bubastis,
where, however, the excavations of Dr. Naville have
shown that she did not become the chief divinity before
the rise of the Twenty-second Dynasty.<note place='foot'>Naville, <hi rend='italic'>Bubastis</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Egypt Exploration Fund</hi>), i. pp. 44, 47, 48.</note>
</p>

<p>
The goddesses passed one into the other even more readily
than the gods. Sekhet developed by turns into Uazit and
Mut, Selk the scorpion, and Hathor of Dendera. Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>I.</hi>,
even at Bubastis, still calls himself the son of Hathor.
</p>

<p>
Hathor played much the same part among the goddesses
that Ra played among the gods. She gradually
absorbed the other female divinities of Egypt. They
were resolved into forms of her, as the gods were resolved
into forms of Ra. The kings of the Sixth Dynasty
called themselves her sons, just as they also called themselves
sons of the sun-god. She presided over the underworld;
she presided also over love and pleasure. The
seven goddesses, who, like fairy godmothers, bestowed all
good things on the newborn child, were called by her
name, and she was even identified with Mut, the starry
sky. Her chief sanctuary was at Dendera, founded in
the first days of the Pharaonic conquest of Egypt.
Here she was supreme; even Horus the elder and the
younger,<note place='foot'>Horus Ahi. The meaning of Ahi, the local title assigned to Horus
the younger, is doubtful.</note> when compelled to form with her a trinity,
remained lay figures and nothing more.
</p>

<p>
She was pictured sometimes as a cow, sometimes as a
woman with the head of a cow bearing the solar disc
between her horns: for from the earliest days she was
associated with the sun. Sometimes she is addressed as
the daughter of Ra;<note place='foot'>Thus at Dendera we read: <q>Ancestral mother of the gods, thou
unitest thyself with thy father Ra in thy festal chamber.</q></note> sometimes the sun-god is her son.
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
At Dendera the solar orb is represented as rising from
her lap, while its rays encircle her head, which rests
upon Bâkhu, the mountain of the sun. In another
chamber of the same temple we see her united with her
son Horus as a hawk with a woman's head in the very
middle of the solar disc, which slowly rises from the
eastern hills. When Isis is figured as a cow, it is
because she is regarded as a form of Hathor.<note place='foot'>The so-called Hathor head with the horns of a cow is already found
on the slate plaque of Kom el-Aḥmar, which is either of the time of the
First Dynasty or pre-Menic (<hi rend='italic'>Zeits. f. Aegypt. Spr.</hi> xxxvi. pl. xii.). A
head of similar type is engraved under the name of Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, discovered at
Koptos (Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Koptos</hi>, pl. v. 7).</note>
</p>

<p>
The original character of Hathor has been a matter of
dispute. Some scholars have made her originally the
sky or space generally, others have called her the
goddess of light, while she has even been identified with
the moon. In the legend of the destruction of mankind
by Ra, she appears as the eye of the sun-god who plies
her work at night; and a text at Dendera speaks of her
as <q>resting on her throne in the place for beholding the
sun's disc, when the bright one unites with the bright
one.</q> In any case she is closely connected with the
rising sun, whose first rays surround her head.
</p>

<p>
Egyptian tradition maintained that she had come
from the land of Punt, from those shores of Arabia and
the opposite African coast from which the Pharaonic
immigrants had made their way to the valley of the
Nile. She was, moreover, the goddess of the Semitic
nomads of the Sinaitic Peninsula; in other words, she
was here identified with the Ashtoreth or Istar of the
Semitic world.<note place='foot'>Horus and Hathor, that is to say, Baal and Ashtoreth, were, according
to the Egyptians, the deities of Mafket, the Sinaitic Peninsula.</note> Now the name of Hathor does not
seem to be Egyptian. It is written with the help of a
sort of rebus, so common in ideographic forms of writing.
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
The pronunciation of the name is given by means of
ideographs, the significations of which have nothing in
common with it, though the sounds of the words they
express approximate to its pronunciation. The name
of Hathor, accordingly, is denoted by writing the hawk
of Horus inside the picture of a <q>house,</q> the name of
which was Hât. A similar method of representing
names is frequent in the ideographic script of ancient
Babylonia; thus the name of Asari, the Egyptian Osiris,
is expressed by placing the picture of an eye (<foreign rend='italic'>shi</foreign>) inside
that of a place (<foreign rend='italic'>eri</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
The name of Hathor, therefore, had primitively
nothing to do with either Horus or the house of Horus,
whatever may have been the speculations which the
priests of a later day founded upon the written form of
the name. It was only an attempt, similar to those
common in the early script of Babylonia, to represent
the pronunciation of a name which had no meaning in
the Egyptian language. But it is a name which we
meet with in the ancient inscriptions of Southern Arabia.
There it appears as the name of the god Atthar. But
Atthar itself was borrowed from Babylonia. It is the name
of the Babylonian goddess Istar, originally the morning
and evening stars, who, an astronomical text tells us, was
at once male and female. As a male god she was adored
in South Arabia and Moab; as the goddess of love and
war she was the chief goddess of Babylonia, the patron
of the Assyrian kings, and the Ashtoreth of Canaan.
When, with the progress of astronomical knowledge, the
morning and evening stars were distinguished from one
another, in one part of Western Asia she remained
identified with the one, in another part with the other.
</p>

<p>
Hathor is then, I believe, the Istar of the Babylonians.
She agrees with Istar both in name and in attributes.
The form of the name can be traced back to that of
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
Istar through the Atthar of South Arabia, that very
land of Punt from which Hathor was said to have come.
In Egypt as in Babylonia she was the goddess of love
and joy, and her relation to the sun can be explained
naturally if she were at the outset the morning star.<note place='foot'>It must be remembered that in Egypt the place occupied by the
morning star in the astronomy and myths of other peoples was taken
by Sirius on account of its importance for the rising of the Nile. And
Sirius was identified with Isis.</note>
Even her animal form connects her with Chaldæa. Dr.
Scheil has published a Babylonian seal of the age of
Abraham, on which the cow, giving milk to a calf,
appears as the symbol of Istar, and a hymn of the time
of Assur-bani-pal identifies the goddess with a cow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xx. p. 62. Dr. Scheil further points out that
the sacred bark of Bau, with whom Istar is identified, was called <q>the
ship of the holy cow.</q> At Dendera also, Isis, in her bark as goddess of
the star Sirius, becomes Hathor under the form of a cow.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have left myself but little time in which to speak of
the gods who interpenetrated and transfigured Egyptian
theology in the period of which we know most. These
are the gods of Thebes. For centuries Thebes was the
dominant centre of a powerful and united Egypt, and its
chief god Amon followed the fortunes of his city.
</p>

<p>
As the word <foreign rend='italic'>amon</foreign> meant <q>to conceal,</q> the priests
discovered in the god an embodiment of a mysterious
and hidden force which pervades and controls the
universe, and of which the sun is as it were the material
organ. But such discoveries were the product of a later
day, when the true meaning of the name had been long
since forgotten, and Theban theology had become pantheistic.
What Amon really signified the priests did
not know, nor are we any wiser.
</p>

<p>
Amon was, however, the local god of Thebes, or rather
of Karnak, and he seems from the first to have been a
sun-god. But he had a rival in the warrior deity Mentu
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
of Hermonthis, who also probably represented the sun.
At any rate, Mentu had the head of a hawk, and therefore
must have been a local form of Horus&mdash;of that
Horus, namely, of whom the Pharaonic Egyptians were
the followers.<note place='foot'>Professor Wiedemann has suggested that the name of Men-tu or
Mon-tu is connected with that of A-mon. It is, however, more reasonable
to associate it with that of the Mentiu or Semitic nomads of the Sinaitic
Peninsula.</note> Like Horus, too, he was a fighting god,
and was accordingly identified in the texts of the Nineteenth
Dynasty with the Canaanitish Baal, <q>the Lord of
hosts.</q> But he was also incarnated in the sacred bull
which was worshipped at Erment, and of which I have
spoken in an earlier lecture. He thus differed from Amon,
who was identified with the ram, the sacred animal of
the aboriginal population, not at Karnak only, but in
the whole of the surrounding district.<note place='foot'>Hence the ram-headed sphinxes that lined the roads leading to the
temple of Karnak. The flesh of the ram was tabooed at Thebes, an indication
that the animal was originally a totem (cf. Herod. ii. 42).</note>
</p>

<p>
But Amon was usually of human form, with two lofty
feathers rising above his crown. Under the Theban
dynasties he became the supreme god, first of Egypt, then
of the Egyptian empire. All other gods had to give way
before him, and to lose their individuality in his. His
supremacy began with the rise of the Eleventh and Twelfth
Dynasties; it was checked for a moment by the Hyksos
conquest of Egypt, but in the end the check proved only
a fresh impulse. It was the princes of Thebes, the
servants of Amon, who raised the standard of revolt
against the Asiatic intruder, and finally drove him back
to Asia. Amon had been their helper in the war of
independence, and it was he who afterwards gained their
victories for them in Syria and Ethiopia. The glory and
wealth of Egypt were all due to him, and upon his
temple and city accordingly the spoils of Asia were
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
lavished, and trains of captives worked under the lash.
The Hyksos invasion, moreover, and the long war of
independence which followed, destroyed the power of the
old feudal princes, while it strengthened and developed
that of the Pharaoh. The influence of the provincial
gods passed away with the feudal princes whose patrons
they had been; the supremacy of the Pharaoh implied
also the supremacy of the Pharaoh's god. There was
none left in Egypt to dispute the proud boast of the
Theban, that Amon was <q>the one god.</q>
</p>

<p>
But he became the one god not by destroying, but by
absorbing the other gods of the country. The doctrines
of the Ennead and the Trinity had prepared the way.
They had taught how easily the gods of the State religion
could be merged one into the other; that their attributes
were convertible, and yet, at the same time, were all that
gave them a distinct personality. The attributes were to
the Egyptian little more than the concrete symbols by
which they were expressed in the picture writing; the
personality was little more than a name. And both
symbols and name could be changed or interchanged
at will.
</p>

<p>
The process of fusion was aided by the identification
of Amon with Ra. The spread of the solar cult of
Heliopolis had introduced the name and worship of Ra
into all the temples of Egypt; the local gods had, as it
were, been incorporated into him, and even the goddesses
forced to become his wives or his daughters. The
Pharaoh, even the Theban Pharaoh, was still <q>the son of
the sun-god</q>; as Amon was also his <q>father,</q> it was a
necessary conclusion that Amon and Ra were one and
the same.
</p>

<p>
In the Theban period, accordingly, Amon is no longer
a simple god. He is Amon-Ra, to whom all the attributes
of Ra have been transferred. The solar element is
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
predominant in his character; and, since the other gods
of the country are but subordinate forms of Amon, in
their characters also. Most of the religious literature of
Egypt which we possess belongs to the Theban period or
is derived from it; it is not astonishing, therefore, if
Egyptologists have been inclined to see the sun-god
everywhere in Egyptian theology.
</p>

<p>
The Theban trinity was modelled on the orthodox
lines. Mut, <q>the mother,</q> a local epithet of the goddess
of Southern Egypt, was made the wife of Amon, while
Khonsu, a local moon-god, became his son. But in acquiring
this relationship Khonsu lost his original nature.<note place='foot'>A stela of Antef <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, found by M. Legrain in 1900, shows that Khonsu
was preceded by Ptaḥ as the third member of the trinity. See above,
p. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</note>
Since the divine son was one with his divine father, he
too became a sun-god, with the solar disc and the hawk's
head. As the designer of architectural plans, however,
he still preserved a reminiscence of his primal character.
But he was eventually superseded by Mentu, a result of
the decadence of Thebes and the rise of Erment to the
headship of the nome. It is needless to say that Mentu
had long before become Mentu-Ra.
</p>

<p>
We can trace the evolution of Amon, thanks to the
multiplicity of the texts which belong to the period when
his city was supreme. We can watch him as he rises
slowly from the position of an obscure provincial deity to
that of the supreme god of all Egypt, and can follow the
causes which brought it about. We can see him uniting
himself with the sun-god, and then absorbing the rest of
the Egyptian gods into himself. The theological thought,
of which he was the subject and centre, gradually but
inexorably passes from a narrow form of polytheism into
a materialistic pantheism. There, however, it ends. It
never advances further into a monotheism in which
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
the creator is separate from his creation. With all its
spirituality, the Egyptian conception of the divine remained
concrete; the theologians of Egypt never escaped
the influence of the symbol or recognised the god behind
and apart from matter. It was through matter that
they came to know God, and to the last it was by matter
that their conception of the Godhead was bounded.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VII. Osiris And The Osirian Faith.</head>

<p>
The legend of Osiris as it existed at the end of the first
century is recorded by Plutarch. It has been pieced
together from the myths and folk-tales of various ages
and various localities that were current about the god.
The Egyptian priests had considerable difficulty in fitting
them into a consistent story; had they been Greek or
Roman historiographers, they would have solved the problem
by declaring that there had been more than one
Osiris; as it was, they were contented with setting the
different accounts of his death and fortunes side by side,
and harmonising them afterwards as best they might.
</p>

<p>
As to the general outlines of the legend, there was no
dispute. Osiris had been an Egyptian Pharaoh who had
devoted his life to doing good, to introducing the elements
of art and culture among his subjects, and transforming
them from savages into civilised men. He was the son
of the sun-god, born on the first of the intercalatory
days, the brother and husband of Isis, and the brother
also of Set or Sut, whom the Greeks called Typhon.
Typhon had as wife his sister Nephthys or Nebhât, but
her son Anubis, the jackal, claimed Osiris as his father.
</p>

<p>
Osiris set forth from his Egyptian kingdom to subdue
the world by the arts of peace, leaving Isis to govern in
his absence. On his return, Set and his seventy-two fellow
conspirators imprisoned him by craft in a chest, which
was thrown into the Nile. In the days when Canaan had
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
become a province of the Egyptian empire, and there were
close relations between the Phœnician cities and the Delta,
it was said that the chest had floated across the sea to
Gebal, where it became embedded in the core of a tree,
which was afterwards cut down and shaped into one of
the columns of the royal palace. Isis wandered from
place to place seeking her lost husband, and mourning
for him; at last she arrived at Gebal, and succeeded
in extracting the chest from its hiding-place, and in
carrying it back to Egypt. But the older version of the
legend knew nothing of the voyage to Gebal. The chest
was indeed found by Isis, but it was near the mouths of
the Nile. Here it was buried for awhile; but Set, while
hunting by night, discovered it, and, tearing open its lid,
cut the body inside into fourteen pieces, which he scattered
to the winds. Then Isis took boat and searched for the
pieces, until she had recovered them all save one. Wherever
a piece was found, a tomb of Osiris arose in later
days. Carefully were the pieces put together by Isis
and Nephthys, and Anubis then embalmed the whole
body. It was the first mummy that was made in the
world.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Horus the younger had been born to Isis,
and brought up secretly at Buto, in the marshes of the
Delta, out of reach of Set. As soon as he was grown to
man's estate he gathered his followers around him, and
prepared himself to avenge his father's death. Long and
fierce was the struggle. Once Set was taken prisoner,
but released by Isis; whereupon Horus, in a fit of anger,
struck off his mother's head, which was replaced by Thoth
with the head of a cow. According to one account, the
contest ended with the victory of Horus. The enemy
were driven from one nome to another, and Horus sat on
the throne of his father. But there were others who
said that the struggle went on with alternating success,
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
until at last Thoth was appointed arbiter, and divided
Egypt between the two foes. Southern Egypt was given
to Horus, Northern Egypt to Set.
</p>

<p>
It is somewhat difficult to disentangle the threads out
of which this story has been woven. Elements of various
sorts are mixed up in it together. Horus the younger,
the posthumous son of Osiris, has been identified with
Horus the elder, the ancient sun-god of Upper Egypt,
and the legends connected with the latter have been
transferred to the son of Isis. The everlasting war between
good and evil has been inextricably confounded
with the war between the Pharaonic Egyptians and the
older population. The solar theology has invaded the
myth of Osiris, making him the son of Ra, and investing
him with solar attributes. Anubis the jackal, who
watched over the cemeteries of Upper Egypt, has been
foisted into it, and has become the servant and minister
of the god of the dead who superseded him. The doctrine
of the Trinity has been applied to it, and Anubis and
Nephthys, who originally were the allies of Osiris, have
been forced to combine with Set. Here and there old
forgotten customs or fragments of folk-lore have been
embodied in the legend: the dismemberment of Osiris,
for example, points to the time when the neolithic inhabitants
of Egypt dismembered their dead; and the preservation
of the body of Osiris in the heart of a tree has
its echo in the Tale of the Two Brothers, in which the
individuality of the hero was similarly preserved. The
green face with which Osiris was represented was in the
same way a traditional reminiscence of the custom of
painting the face of the dead with green paint, which was
practised by the neolithic population of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
There are three main facts in the personality of Osiris
which stand out clearly amid the myths and theological
inventions which gathered round his name. He was a
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
human god; he was the first mummy; and he became
the god of the dead. And the paradise over which he
ruled, and to which the faithful souls who believed in
him were admitted, was the field of Alu, a land of light
and happiness.
</p>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Sekhet Alu</foreign>, <q>the field of Alu,</q> seems to have been the
cemetery of Busiris among the marshes of the Delta.<note place='foot'>So Lauth, <hi rend='italic'>Aus Aegypten's Vorzeit</hi>, p. 61; Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
géographique</hi>, pp. 61, 62; Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>The Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 180.
The evidence, however, is not quite clear.</note>
The name meant <q>the field of marsh-mallows,</q>&mdash;the
<q>asphodel meadows</q> of the <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>,&mdash;and was applied
to one of the islands which were so numerous in the
north-eastern part of the Delta. Here, then, in the
nome of which Osiris was the feudal god, the paradise
of his followers originally lay, though a time came
when it was translated from the earth to the sky. But
when Osiris first became lord of the dead, the land to
which they followed him was still within the confines of
Egypt.
</p>

<p>
It would seem, therefore, that Professor Maspero is
right in holding that Osiris was primarily the god of
Busiris in the Delta. It is the only nome of which he
was formally the presiding deity, under the title of Ânz,
<q>the king,</q> and it bordered on Hermopolis, which was
dedicated to the ibis-god Thoth, who is so closely connected
with the story of Osiris.<note place='foot'>The bronze figures of the ibis found at Tel el-Baqlîya, on the east bank
of the Damietta branch of the Nile, opposite Abusir or Busiris, have
shown that it is the site of the capital of the Hermopolite nome.</note> To the north stood the
temple of Isis-Rennet,<note place='foot'>At Beḥbêt near Mansûra.</note> to the south-west was Pharbæthos
(Horbêt), which worshipped Set, while Horus was the
god of many of the neighbouring nomes. The whole
cycle of Osirian deities is thus to be found within the
confines of a small tract of the Delta.
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
The name Busiris means simply <q>the place of Osiris.</q>
Primitively it had been called Daddu, <q>the two colonnades,</q><note place='foot'>This, at least, is how the name is usually written. But on an early
seal-cylinder which I have published in the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi>, Feb. 1898,
No. 2, where we read, <q>The city of the ram, the city which is called
Dad,</q> the name is written <foreign rend='italic'>D-d</foreign>, and on a libation-table of the Sixth
Dynasty from El-Kab we find <foreign rend='italic'>Dad-d-u</foreign> (Quibell, <hi rend='italic'>El-Kab</hi>, pl. iv. 1). The
earlier pronunciation of the name as found in the Pyramid texts is
Zaddu or Zadu.</note>
and Osiris became known as its lord. It was
under this title that he was incarnated in the ram of the
neighbouring town of Mendes on the eastern boundary
of Hermopolis. The ram became his soul; all the more
easily since the Egyptian words for <q>ram</q> and <q>soul</q>
had the same or a similar pronunciation. At Dendera
it is said that in the ram of Mendes Osiris grew young
again; and in the later days of solar syncretism the four
souls of Ra and Osiris, of Shu and Khepera, were united
in its body. How far back this identification of the god
and the sacred animal may reach we do not know. But
it is significant that it was not at Daddu itself, but at
a neighbouring city, that the animal was worshipped,
though a seal-cylinder which belongs to the oldest period
of Egyptian history already declares that Daddu was
<q>the city of the ram.</q><note place='foot'>As early as the age of the Pyramid texts the column Dad had come
to be explained as a picture of the spine, or rather spinal column (<foreign rend='italic'>zad</foreign>), of
Osiris, which was supposed to be preserved at Daddu or Pi-Asar-neb-Daddu
or Abusir. See <hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nebhât and Anubis had originally nothing to do with
the god of Busiris. Nebhât, in fact, is merely a title
which has been fossilised into the name of a deity. It
is merely the ordinary title of the Egyptian lady as <q>the
mistress of the house,</q> who thus stands on the same
footing as <q>the lord of the house,</q> her husband. The
title could have been given to any goddess who was
conceived of in human form, and was doubtless applied
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
to Isis the wife of Osiris. He was <q>the lord</q> of the
city; she, <q>the lady of the house.</q> It reminds us of the
way in which the deities of Babylonia were addressed.
There, too, the god was <q>the lord,</q> the goddess <q>the
lady.</q> The old titles of Osiris and Isis which have
thus survived in the Osirian myth are essentially
Babylonian.
</p>

<p>
Nebhât or Nephthys was individualised in order to
complete the trinity of Set, of which Set was the
central figure. We can tell, accordingly, when she
thus developed into a separate goddess. It was when
the doctrine of the Trinity first became dominant in the
Egyptian schools of theology, and all the chief deities of
the country were forced to conform to it. Anubis, the
second person in the trinity of Set, must have already
been attached to the cult of Osiris. How this came
about is not difficult to discover. Anubis the jackal
was the god of the underworld. Like his symbol, the
jackal, he watched over the tombs, more especially in
<q>the mountain</q> far away from the cultivated land. His
sacred animal already appears mounted on its standard
on the early slate plaques of Nekhen and Abydos by the
side of the Horus-hawk. He was, in fact, worshipped in
many of the nomes, above all at Siût, where he was
adored as <q>the opener of the paths</q> to the world below.
He was the inventor of the art of embalming; he
must therefore have been the god of the dead when
the Pharaonic Egyptians first settled themselves in
Upper Egypt. In one sense, indeed, he was younger
than Horus, since <q>the followers of Horus</q> had not
brought the art with them from their earlier home; but
he was already god of the dead, and the discovery of the
art was accordingly ascribed to him.
</p>

<p>
The acceptance of Osiris as the god of the underworld
meant the displacement of Anubis. He had to make
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
way for <q>the lord of Daddu.</q> The fact is a striking
illustration of the influence which the Osirian teaching
must have possessed. Osiris was the feudal god only of
a nome in the north of the Delta; Anubis had been
adored from time immemorial throughout the valley of
the Nile. The cities which recognised him as their
chief deity were numerous and powerful. Nevertheless
he had to yield to the rival god and take a subordinate
place beside him. He remained, indeed, in the pantheon,
for the Egyptians never broke with their past; but the
part he had played in it was taken by another, and he
was content to become merely the minister of Osiris and
the guardian of the cemeteries of the dead.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Osiris, like the Greek Dionysos, had
pursued his victorious march. Wherever his worship
extended his temple rose by the side of his tomb like
the temples attached to the Pyramids. Like Ptaḥ of
Memphis or the mummified Horus of Nekhen, he was a
dead god, and it was to a dead god consequently that
the offering was made and the priest dedicated. It was
at Abydos in Upper Egypt, however, that his fame was
greatest. Abydos was the sepulchral temple of Osiris
attached to the city of This, and This was not only the
seat of a powerful kingdom, which probably succeeded
that of Nekhen, but the birthplace of Menes, the founder
of the united monarchy. Around the tomb of the Osiris
of Abydos, accordingly, the kings and princes of the
Thinite dynasties were buried, and where the Pharaoh
was buried his subjects wished to be buried too. From
all parts of Egypt the bodies of the dead were brought
to the sacred ground, that they might be interred as near
as possible to the tomb of the god, and so their mummies
might repose beside him on earth as they hoped
their souls would do in the paradise of the Blest. Even
the rise of the Memphite dynasties did not deprive
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
Abydos of its claim to veneration. Its sanctity was
too firmly established; hundreds of Egyptians still continued
to be buried there, rather than in the spacious
necropolis of the Memphite Pharaohs.<note place='foot'>Not unfrequently a rich Egyptian who was buried at Saqqâra had a
cenotaph at Abydos. I believe that the fashion had been set by the
founder of the united monarchy himself, and that besides the tomb of
Menes at Negada there was also a cenotaph of the king at Abydos. At
all events clay impressions of his Ka-name Aḥa have been found there in
the Omm el-Ga'ab.</note> Abydos, with its
royal memories, threw the older city of Osiris into the
shade. He still, it is true, retained his ancient title of
<q>lord of Daddu,</q> but it was an archaism rather than a
reality, and it was as <q>lord of Abydos</q> that he was now
with preference addressed.
</p>

<p>
But other sanctuaries disputed with Abydos its claim
to possess the tomb of the god of the dead. Wherever a
temple was erected in his honour, his tomb also was
necessarily to be found. An attempt was made to
harmonise their conflicting claims by falling back on the
old tradition of the custom of dismembering the dead:
the head of the god was at Abydos, his heart at Athribis,
his neck at Letopolis. But even so the difficulty remained:
the separate limbs would not suffice for the
number of the tombs, and the same member was sometimes
claimed by more than one locality. At Memphis,
for example, where Osiris was united with Apis into the
compound Serapis, his head was said to have been
interred as well as at Abydos.
</p>

<p>
Abydos, at the outset, was the cemetery, or rather one
of the cemeteries, of This. And the god of This was the
sun-god Anher, who was depicted in human form. In
the age which produced the doctrine of the Ennead,
Anher was identified with Shu, the atmosphere, or, more
strictly speaking, the god of the space between sky and
earth was merged into the god of the sun. But it was
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
not only at This that Anher was worshipped. He was
also the god of Sebennytos, which adjoined the Busirite
nome, and where, therefore, the human sun-god was in
immediate contact with the human god of the dead.
What the mummy was to the living man, that Osiris was
to Anher.<note place='foot'>The title borne by Osiris at Abydos was Khent-amentit, <q>the ruler of
the west.</q> There is no need of turning the title into a separate god who
was afterwards identified with Osiris: he was as much Osiris as was Neb-Daddu,
<q>the lord of Daddu.</q> Professor Maspero says with truth that
<q>Khent-amentit was the dead Anher, a sun which had set in the west</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. p. 24)&mdash;or rather,
perhaps, a sun that was setting in the west, as his domain was the
necropolis of Omm el-Ga'ab, immediately eastward of the western boundary
of hills. When <q>Osiris of Daddu</q> is distinguished from <q>Khent-Amentit
of Abydos,</q> as on a stela of the Eleventh Dynasty (Daressy in
the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xiv. p. 23), this is only in accordance with the
Egyptian habit of transforming a divine epithet into a separate deity.</note>
</p>

<p>
The double relation between Osiris and Anher in both
Lower and Upper Egypt cannot be an accident. Osiris
became the god of Abydos, because Abydos was the
cemetery of This, whose feudal god was Anher. The
relation that existed in the Delta, between Anher the
sun-god of Sebennytos, and Osiris the god of the dead at
Busiris, was transferred also to Southern Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Whom or what did Osiris originally represent? To
this many answers have been given. Of late Egyptologists
have seen in him sometimes a personification of
mankind, sometimes the river Nile, sometimes the cultivated
ground. After the rise of the solar school of
theology the Egyptians themselves identified him with
the sun when it sinks below the horizon to traverse the
dark regions of the underworld. Horus the sun-god of
morning thus became his son, born as it were of the sun-god
of night, and differing from his father only in his
form of manifestation.<note place='foot'>Already in the Pyramid texts Horus is said to have assisted in the
burial of Osiris, who goes to the plains of Alu with <q>the great gods that
proceed from On</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> ii. 864-872); and we have perhaps a reminiscence
of the spread of the Osirian cult to the south and the identification of
Osiris with Akhem, the mummified Horus of Nekhen, in <hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> ii. 849, where
we read: <q>Seb installs by his rites Osiris as god, to whom the watchers
in Pe make offering, and the watchers in Nekhen venerate him</q> (Maspero
in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xii. p. 168). Pe and Nekhen were the capitals
of the two pre-Menic kingdoms of Northern and Southern Egypt, and on a
stela from Nekhen (Kom el-Aḥmar) in the Cairo Museum, <q>Horus of
Nekhen</q> is identified with Osiris (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xiv. p. 22, No.
xx.). In the inscriptions of the Pyramid of Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>II.</hi>, lines 864-5, it is
said that Isis and Nebhât wept for Osiris at Pe along with <q>the souls of
Pe.</q> Pe with its temple of the younger Horus, and Dep with its temple
of Uazit the goddess of the north, together formed the city called Buto
by the Greeks.</note>
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
We have, however, one or two facts to guide us in
determining the primitive character of the god. He was
a mummified man like Ptaḥ of Memphis, and he was the
brother and enemy of Set. Set or Sut became for
the later Egyptians the impersonation of evil. He was
identified with Apophis, the serpent of wickedness, against
whom the sun-god wages perpetual war; and his name
was erased from the monuments on which it was engraved.
But all this was because Set was the god and
the representative of the Asiatic invaders who had
conquered Egypt, and aroused in the Egyptian mind a
feeling of bitter animosity towards themselves. As late
as the time of the Nineteenth Dynasty, the Pharaohs
who restored Tanis, the Hyksos capital, to something of
its former glory, called themselves after the name of the
Hyksos deity. Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of the Eighteenth Dynasty
built a temple in honour of Set of Ombos, who was
worshipped near Dendera; and if we go back to the
oldest records of the united monarchy, we find Set
symbolising the north while Horus symbolises the south.
Before the days of Menes, Set was the god of Northern
Egypt, Horus of Southern Egypt. In the prehistoric
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
wars of the two kingdoms the two gods would be hostile
to one another, and yet brethren.
</p>

<p>
It was the armies of Set that were driven by Horus
and his metal-bearing followers from one end of Egypt
to the other, and finally overcome.<note place='foot'>So in the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 171, 172).</note> Set therefore represents
in the legend the older population of the valley
of the Nile. The reason of this is not far to seek. Set
or Sut, like Sati, denotes the Semitic or African nomad
of the desert, the Babylonian Sutu. He is the equivalent
of the Bedâwi of to-day, who still hovers on the Egyptian
borders, and between whom and the fellah there is
perpetual feud. The same cause which made Horus the
brother and yet the enemy of Set must have been at
work to place Osiris in the same relation to him. Osiris
too must have typified the Pharaonic Egyptian, and like
Horus have been the first of the Pharaohs. Hence his
human body, and hence also the confusion between himself
and Horus, which ended in making Horus his son
and in generating a new Horus&mdash;Horus the younger&mdash;by
the side of the older Horus of the Egyptian
faith.<note place='foot'>The origin of the name of Set had already been forgotten in the age of
the Pyramid texts, where it is explained by the determinative <foreign rend='italic'>set</foreign>, <q>a
stone.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The position of Osiris in respect to Anher is now
clear. He is the sun-god after his setting in the west,
when he has passed to the region of the dead in the
underworld. He stands, therefore, in exactly the same
relation to Anher that the mummified hawk stands to
the Horus-hawk. The one belongs to the city of the
living, the other to the city of the dead. But they are
both the same deity under different forms, one of which
presides over the city, the other over its burying-ground.
Like Horus, Osiris must have been a sun-god of the
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
Pharaonic Egyptians, but a sun-god who was connected
for some special reason with the dead.<note place='foot'>When the hieroglyphic name of the Busirite nome was first invented,
Osiris was still the living <q>lord of Daddu</q> rather than the mummified
patron of its necropolis, since it represents him as a living Pharaoh with
the title of <foreign rend='italic'>ânz</foreign> or <q>chieftain.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Now Mr. Ball has drawn attention to the fact that
there was a Sumerian god who had precisely the same
name as Osiris, and that this name is expressed in both
cases by precisely the same ideographs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, xii. 8, pp. 401-402.</note> The etymology
of the name has been sought in vain in Egyptian. But
the cuneiform texts make it clear. Osiris (As-ar) is the
Asari of ancient Babylonia, who was called Merodach by
the Semites, and whose ordinary title is <q>the god who
does good to man.</q> The name of Asari is written with
two ideographs, one of which denotes <q>a place</q> and the
other <q>an eye,</q> and the forms of the two ideographs, as
well as their meanings, are identical with those of the
hieroglyphic characters which represent Osiris. Such a
threefold agreement cannot be accidental: both the name
and the mode of writing it must have come from Babylonia.
And what makes the agreement the stronger is
the fact that the ideographs have nothing to do with the
signification of the name itself; they express simply its
pronunciation. In the Sumerian of early Babylonia the
name signified <q>the mighty one.</q><note place='foot'>The origin of the name of Osiris had been forgotten by the Egyptians
long before the age of the Pyramid texts, where we find (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 229) the
grammatical goddess User-t invented to explain Osiris, as if the latter were
the adjective <foreign rend='italic'>user</foreign>, <q>strong</q>! M. Grébaut long ago expressed his belief
that Osiris was of foreign origin (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, i. p. 120).</note>
</p>

<p>
Asari was the sun-god of Eridu, the ancient seaport
of Babylonia on the Persian Gulf. He was the son of
Ea, the chief god of the city, of whose will and wisdom
he was the interpreter. It was he who communicated to
men the lessons in culture and the art of healing, which
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
Ea was willing they should learn. Just as Osiris spent
his life in doing good, according to the Egyptian legend,
so Asari was he <q>who does good to man.</q> He was ever
on the watch to help his worshippers, to convey to them
the magic formulas which could ward off sickness or evil,
and, as it is often expressed, to <q>raise the dead to
life.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this last expression we have the key to the part
played by Osiris. Osiris died, and was buried, like Asari
or Merodach, whose temple at Babylon was also his tomb;
but it was that he might rise again in the morning
with renewed strength and brilliancy. And through the
spells he had received from his father all those who
trusted in him, and shared in his death and entombment,
were also <q>raised to life.</q> Both in Egypt and
in Babylonia he was the god of the resurrection,
whether that took place in this visible world or in
the heavenly paradise, which was a purified reflection of
the earth.
</p>

<p>
In Babylonia, Asari or Merodach was the champion of
light and order, who conquered the dragon of chaos and
her anarchic forces, and put the demons of darkness to
flight. In Egypt that part was taken by Horus. But
both Anher and Osiris were merely local forms&mdash;local
names, if the phrase should be preferred&mdash;of Horus and
the mummified hawk. Anher is sometimes represented,
like Horus, with the spear in his hand, overthrowing the
wicked; but his figure was eclipsed by that of Osiris, who
had come to be regarded as the benefactor of mankind,
and to whom men prayed in sickness and death. A
god of the dead, however, could not be a conqueror; it
was he, and not his foe, who had died, and consequently
the victories gained by Horus could not be ascribed to
him. But the difficulty was not insoluble; Horus
became his son, who was at the same time his father,
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
and the old struggle between Horus and Set was
transferred to the Osirian cult.
</p>

<p>
It is significant, however, that in the recently-recovered
monuments of the Thinite dynasties Set is still the twin-brother
of Horus. He still represents the north, until
lately the antagonist of the south; and a king whose
remains have been found at Nekhen and Abydos, and
who calls himself <q>the uniter of the two sceptres</q> of
Egypt, still sets the Horus-hawk and the animal of Set
above his name.
</p>

<p>
Set, as I have already said, is the Sutu or Bedâwi.
He was adored elsewhere than in Egypt; the Moabites
called themselves his children (Num. xxiv. 17), and in
the cuneiform texts Sutu-sar (<q>Sutu the king</q>) and
Nabu-rabê (<q>Nebo the great</q>) are described as twins.<note place='foot'>Nebo or Nabium (Nabu), <q>the prophet,</q> was the interpreter of the
will of Merodach, just as Merodach was the interpreter of the will
of Ea.</note>
But in Egypt he represented the population which had
been conquered by the Pharaonic Egyptians or continued
to live on the desert frontiers of the country, and which
was stronger in the Delta than in the south. The old
struggle, therefore, between light and darkness, order and
confusion, which formed the background of Babylonian
mythology, became the struggle which was waged for
such long centuries, first between the Pharaonic Egyptians
and the neolithic races, then between the kingdoms of
the south and north, and finally between the united
monarchy and the Bedâwin of the desert or assailants
from Asia. Where the foreign element prevailed, Set
was an honoured god; where the ruling Egyptian was
dominant, his place was taken by his brother and his
antagonist.
</p>

<p>
It has been thought that the struggle between Horus
and Set typified the struggle that is ever going on
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
between the desert and the cultivated land. But such
an idea is far too abstract to have formed the basis
of an Egyptian religious myth. It might have been
elaborated subsequently by some theological school out
of the contrast between the Sutu of the desert and
the god of the agriculturists; but it could never have
been there originally. The interpretation is as little
justifiable as that which sees in Osiris the seed that
is buried in the ground.
</p>

<p>
It is indeed true that the Egyptians of a later period,
when the Osirian doctrine of the Resurrection was fully
developed, found an analogy to it in the seed that is
sown in order to grow again. The tomb of Ma-her-pa-Ra,
the fan-bearer of Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of the Eighteenth
Dynasty, discovered by M. Loret in the valley of the
Tombs of the Kings at Thebes, contains a proof of this.
In it was a rudely-constructed bed with a mattress, on
which the figure of Osiris had been drawn. On this
earth was placed, and in the earth grains of corn had
been sown. The corn had sprouted and grown to the
height of a few inches before it had withered away.
But such symbolism is, like the similar symbolism of
Christianity, the result of the doctrine of the resurrection
and not the origin of it. It is not till men believe that
the human body can rise again from the sleep of corruption,
that the growth of the seed which has been
buried in the ground is invoked to explain and confirm
their creed.
</p>

<p>
How came this doctrine of the resurrection to be
attached to the cult of Osiris and to become an integral
part of Egyptian belief? There is only one answer that
can be given to this: the doctrine of the resurrection
was a necessary accompaniment of the practice of
mummification, and Osiris was a mummified god.
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that old Babylonian hymns
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
describe Asari or Merodach as the god <q>who raises the
dead to life.</q> We have also seen that Osiris was not
the only mummified god known in Egypt. Ptaḥ of
Memphis was also a mummy; so too was the mummified
Horus of Nekhen, who was worshipped even in the
Delta in the <q>Arabian</q> nome of Goshen on the borders
of Asia. Whether or not the practice of embalming
first originated at Nekhen, where it was discovered that
bodies buried in the nitrogenous soil of El-Kab were
preserved undecayed, it is certain that, like the art of
writing, it characterised the Pharaonic Egyptians from
the earliest times. In no other way can we explain
the existence among them of their mummified gods.
But its adoption by the older races who still formed
the bulk of the people was but gradual. It did not
become universal before the age of the Eighteenth
Dynasty.
</p>

<p>
It was not, however, the bulk of the people, but the
ruling classes, who worshipped Osiris, and among whom
his cult spread and grew. He became for them Un-nefer,
<q>the good being,</q> ready to heal for them even
the pains of death, and to receive them in his realm
beyond the grave, where life and action would be restored
to them. The sun shone there as it did here,
for was not Osiris himself a sun-god? the fields of the
blessed were like those of Egypt, except that no sickness
or death came near them, that no blight ever fell on
fruit or corn, that the Nile never failed, and that the
heat was always tempered by the northern breeze.
</p>

<p>
The <q>field of Alu,</q> the Elysion of the Greeks, was at
first in the marshes of the Delta near the mouths of the
Nile, like the paradise of early Babylonia, which too
was <q>at the mouth of the rivers.</q> But it soon migrated
to the north-eastern portion of the sky, and the Milky
Way became the heavenly Nile. Here the dead lived
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
in perpetual happiness under the rule of Osiris, working,
feasting, reading, even fighting, as they would below,
only without pain and eternally.<note place='foot'>The constellation of Osiris was called <q>the soul of Osiris,</q> and
Professor Maspero notes that the Pyramid texts place his kingdom near
the Great Bear (<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, ii. p. 20). Isis
became Sirius, and Horus the morning star.</note>
</p>

<p>
But, in order to share in this state of bliss, it was
necessary for the believer in Osiris to become like the
god himself. He must himself be an Osiris, according
to the Egyptian expression. His individuality remained
intact; as he had been on earth, so would he be in
heaven. The Osiris, in fact, was a spiritualised body
in which the immortal parts of man were all united
together. Soul and spirit, heart and double, all met
together in it as they had done when the individual was
on earth.
</p>

<p>
It is clear that the doctrine of the Osiris in its developed
form is inconsistent with the idea of the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>.
But it is also clear that without the idea of the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> it
would never have been formed. Both presuppose an
individuality separate from the person to which it
belongs, and yet at the same time material, an individuality
which continues after death and manifests
itself under the same shape as that which characterised
the person in life. The popular conception of the ghost,
which reproduces not only the features but even the
dress of the dead, is analogous. Fundamentally the
Osiris is a <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>, but it is a <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> which represents not only
the outward shape, but the inner essence as well. The
whole man is there, spiritually, morally, intellectually,
as well as corporeally. The doctrine of the Osiris
thus absorbs, as it were, the old idea of the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>, and
spiritualises it, at the same time confining it to the life
after death.
</p>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<p>
But if the conception of a double, unsubstantial and
yet materialised, underlay the belief in the Osiris, the
practice of embalming was equally responsible for it.
The continued existence of the double was dependent
on the continued existence of the body, for the one
presupposed the other, and it was only the mummified
body which could continue to exist. As long as the
double was believed to haunt the tomb, and there receive
the food and other offerings which were provided for it,
the connection between it and the mummy presented no
difficulties. But when the Egyptian came to look forward
to the heaven of Osiris, first on this nether earth
and then in the skies, the case was wholly altered. The
mummy lay in the tomb, the immortal counterpart of
the man himself was in another and a spiritual world.
The result was inevitable: the follower of Osiris soon
assured himself that one day the mummified body also
would have life and action again breathed into it and
rejoin its Osiris in the fields of paradise. Had not the
god carried thither his divine body as well as its counterpart?
and what the god had done those who had become
even as he was could also do.
</p>

<p>
In this way the doctrine of the resurrection of the
body became an integral part of the Osirian faith. The
future happiness to which its disciples looked forward
was not in absorption into the divinity, or contemplation
of the divine attributes, or a monotonous existence of
passive idleness. They were to live as they had done
in this life, only without sorrow and suffering, without
sin, and eternally. But all their bodily powers and
interests were to remain and be gratified as they could
not be in this lower world. The realm over which
Osiris ruled was the idealised reproduction of that Egypt
which the Egyptian loved so well, with its sunshine and
light, its broad and life-bearing river, its fertile fields,
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
and its busy towns. Those who dwelt in it could indeed
feast and play, could lounge in canoes and fish or hunt,
could read tales and poems or write treatises on morality,
could transform themselves into birds that alighted among
the thick foliage of the trees; but they must also work
as they had done here, must cultivate the soil before
it would produce its ears of wheat two cubits high,
must submit to the corvée and embank the canals.
The Osirian heaven had no place for the idle and
inactive.
</p>

<p>
No sooner, indeed, had the dead man been pronounced
worthy of admittance to it, than he was called upon to
work. At the very outset of his new existence, before
any of its pleasures might be tasted, he was required to
till the ground and guide the plough. This was no hardship
to the poor fellah who had spent his life in agricultural
labour. But it was otherwise with the rich
man whose lands had been cultivated by others, while
he himself had merely enjoyed their produce. In the
early days of Egyptian history, accordingly, it was
the fashion for the feudal landowner to surround his
tomb with the graves of his servants and retainers,
whose bodies were mummified and buried at his expense.
What they had performed for him in this world, it was
believed they would perform for him in the world to
come. There, too, the Osiris of the fellah would work
for the Osiris of the wealthy, whose necessary task would
thus be performed vicariously.
</p>

<p>
But as time went on a feeling grew up that in the
sight of Osiris all those who were assimilated to him
were equal one to the other. Between one Osiris and
another the distinctions of rank and station which prevail
here were no longer possible. The old conception of
the ka came to the help of the believer. The place of
the human servant was taken by the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>, that little
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
figure of clay or wood which represented a peasant, and
whose double, accordingly, was sent to assist the dead in
his tasks above. The human Osiris, whatever his lot in
this life had been, was henceforth free from the toils
which had once awaited him in the fields of Alu; he
could look on while the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> of the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign> performed his
work. The <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>-figures become especially numerous
after the expulsion of the Hyksos. The domination of
the foreigner and the long war of independence which
put an end to it, had destroyed the feudal nobility,
and therewith the feudal ideas which regarded mankind
as divided, now and hereafter, into two classes. From
thenceforth the Egyptians became the democratic people
that they still are. As the Pharaoh on earth ruled a
people who before him were all equal, so between the
subjects of Osiris, the Pharaoh in heaven, no distinctions
of rank were known except such as were conferred by
himself.
</p>

<p>
The same belief which had substituted the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign> for
the human peasant had filled the tombs with the objects
which, it was thought, would best please the dead man.
Besides the meat and drink which had been provided for
the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> from time immemorial, there was now placed beside
the mummy everything which it was imagined he would
need or desire in the other world. Even the books
which the dead man had delighted in during his earthly
existence were not forgotten. It was not necessary,
however, that the actual objects should be there. It
was the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> only of the object that was wanted, and
that could be furnished by a representation of the object
as well as by the object itself. And so, besides the
actual clothes or tools or weapons that are buried in
the tombs, we find imitation clothes and tools, like the
<q>ghost-money</q> of the Greeks, or even paintings on the
wall, which, so long as the object was correctly depicted
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
in them, were considered quite sufficient. One of the
most touching results of this thorough-going realism has
been noticed by Professor Wiedemann.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of Immortality</hi>, p. 48.</note> <q>The soles of
the feet (of the mummy) which had trodden the mire
of earth were removed, in order that the Osiris might
tread the Hall of Judgment with pure feet; and the gods
were prayed to grant milk to the Osiris that he might
bathe his feet in it and so assuage the pain which the
removal of the soles must needs have caused him. And,
finally, the soles</q> were then placed within the mummy,
that he might find them at hand on the day of resurrection,
and meantime make use of their <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the resurrection of the body involved
also a doctrine of a judgment of the deeds committed by
the body. Those only were admitted into the kingdom
of Osiris who, like their leader, had done good to men.
A knowledge of the Ritual with its divine lore and incantations
was not sufficient to unlock its gates. The
Osiris who entered it had to be morally as well as
ceremonially pure. Osiris was not only a king; he
was a judge also, and those who appeared before him
had to prove that their conduct in this life had been
in conformity with one of the highest of the moral
codes of antiquity.
</p>

<p>
This moral test of righteousness is the most remarkable
fact connected with the Osirian system of doctrine.
The Egyptian who accepted it was called on to acknowledge
that orthodoxy in belief and practice was not
sufficient to ensure his future salvation; it was needful
that he should have avoided sin and been actively
benevolent as well. Unlike most ancient forms of faith,
morality&mdash;and that too of a high order&mdash;was made an
integral part of religion, and even set above it. It was
not so much what a man believed as what he had done
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
that enabled him to pass the awful tribunal of heaven
and be admitted to everlasting bliss.
</p>

<p>
The Book of the Dead was the guide of the dead man
on his journey to the other world. Its chapters were
inscribed on the rolls buried with the mummy, or were
painted on the coffin and the walls of the tomb. It
was the Ritual which prescribed the prayers and incantations
to be repeated in the course of the journey,
and described the enemies to be met with on the other
side of the grave. Thanks to its instructions, the dead
passed safely through the limbo which divides this earth
from the kingdom of Osiris, and arrived at last at the
Judgment Hall, the hall of the Twofold Truth, where
Mât, the goddess of truth and law, received him. Here
on his judgment throne sat Osiris, surrounded by the
forty-two assessors of divine justice from the forty-two
nomes of Egypt, while Thoth and the other deities of
the Osirian cycle stood near at hand. Then the dead
man was called upon to show reason why he should be
admitted to the fields of Alu, and to prove that during
his lifetime he had practised mercy and justice and had
abstained from evil-doing. The negative confession put
into his mouth is one of the most noteworthy relics of
ancient literature. <q>Praise be to thee (O Osiris),</q> he was
made to say, <q rend='pre'>lord of the Twofold Truth! Praise to thee,
great god, lord of the Twofold Truth! I come to thee,
my lord, I draw near to see thine excellencies.<note place='foot'>Renouf's translation of the 125th chapter of the Book of the Dead
(<hi rend='italic'>Papyrus of Ani</hi>) is as follows:&mdash;<q>I am not a doer of what is wrong.
I am not a plunderer. I am not a robber. I am not a slayer of men.
I do not stint the measure of corn. I am not a niggard. I do not desire
the property of the gods. I am not a teller of lies. I am not a monopoliser
of food. I am no extortioner. I am not unchaste. I am not
the cause of others' tears. I am not a dissembler. I am not a doer of
violence. I am not a domineering character. I do not pillage cultivated
land. I am not an eavesdropper. I am not a chatterer. I do not
dismiss a case through self-interest. I am not unchaste with women or
men. I am not obscene. I am not an exciter of alarms. I am not hot
in speech. I do not turn a deaf ear to the words of righteousness. I am
not foul-mouthed. I am not a striker. I am not a quarreller. I do not
revoke my words. I do not multiply clamour in reply to words. I am
not evil-minded or a doer of evil. I am not a reviler of the king. I put
no obstruction on (the use of the Nile) water. I am not a bawler. I am
not a reviler of the god. I am not fraudulent. I am not sparing in
offerings to the gods. I do not deprive the dead of the funeral cakes. I
take not away the cakes of the child, or profane the god of my locality.
I do not kill sacred animals.</q></note>...</q>
</p>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<p>
I have not acted with deceit or done evil to
men.
</p>

<p>
I have not oppressed the poor.
</p>

<p>
I have not judged unjustly.
</p>

<p>
I have not known ought of wicked things.
</p>

<p>
I have not committed sin.
</p>

<p>
I have not exacted more work from the labourer than
was just.
</p>

<p>
I have not been anxious. I have not been feeble of
purpose.
</p>

<p>
I have not defaulted. I have not been niggardly.
</p>

<p>
I have not done what the gods abhor.
</p>

<p>
I have not caused the slave to be ill-treated by his
master.
</p>

<p>
I have made none to hunger.
</p>

<p>
I have made none to weep.
</p>

<p>
I have not committed murder.
</p>

<p>
I have not caused any man to be treacherously murdered.
</p>

<p>
I have not dealt treacherously with any one.
</p>

<p>
I have not diminished the offerings of bread in the
temples.
</p>

<p>
I have not spoiled the shewbread of the gods.
</p>

<p>
I have not robbed the dead of their loaves and cerecloths.
</p>

<p>
I have not been unchaste.
</p>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<p>
I have not defiled myself in the sanctuary of the god
of my city.
</p>

<p>
I have not stinted and been niggardly of offerings.
</p>

<p>
I have not defrauded in weighing the scales.
</p>

<p>
I have not given false weight.
</p>

<p>
I have not taken the milk from the mouth of the
child.
</p>

<p>
I have not hunted the cattle in their meadows.
</p>

<p>
I have not netted the birds of the gods.
</p>

<p>
I have not fished in their preserves.
</p>

<p>
I have not kept the water (from my neighbour) in the
time of inundation.
</p>

<p>
I have not cut off a water channel.
</p>

<p>
I have not extinguished the flame at a wrong
time.
</p>

<p>
I have not defrauded the Ennead of the gods of the
choice parts of the victims.
</p>

<p>
I have not driven away the oxen of the temple.
</p>

<p>
I have not driven back a god when he has left the
temple.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>I am pure! I am pure! I am pure!</q><note place='foot'>Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten Aegypter</hi>, pp. 132, 133; and
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, pp. 188-190.</note>
</p>

<p>
The negative confession ended, the dead man turned to
the forty-two assessors and pleaded that he was innocent
of the particular sin which they had been severally
appointed to judge. Then he once more addressed
Osiris with a final plea for justification: <q>Hail to you,
ye gods who are in the great hall of the Twofold Truth,
who have no falsehood in your bosoms, but who live on
truth in On, and feed your hearts upon it before the
lord god who dwelleth in his solar disc. Deliver me
from the Typhon who feedeth on entrails, O chiefs! in
this hour of supreme judgment; grant that the deceased
may come unto you, he who hath not sinned, who hath
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
neither lied, nor done evil, nor committed any crime, who
hath not borne false witness, who hath done nought
against himself, but who liveth on truth, who feedeth on
truth. He hath spread joy on all sides; men speak of
that which he hath done, and the gods rejoice in it. He
hath reconciled the god to him by his love; he hath
given bread to the hungry, water to the thirsty, clothing
to the naked; he hath given a boat to the shipwrecked;
he hath offered sacrifices to the gods, sepulchral meals to
the dead. Deliver him from himself, speak not against
him before the lord of the dead, for his mouth is pure
and his hands are pure!</q><note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 190.</note>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the heart of the dead man&mdash;his conscience,
as we should call it in our modern phraseology&mdash;was
being weighed in the balance against the image of truth.
Something more convincing was needed than his own
protestation that he had acted uprightly and done no
wrong. The heart was placed in the scale by Thoth, who,
knowing the weakness of human nature, inclined the
balance a little in its favour. Anubis superintended
the weighing, while Thoth recorded the result. If the
verdict were favourable, he addressed Osiris in the following
words: <q>Behold the deceased in this Hall of
the Twofold Truth, his heart hath been weighed in the
balance, in the presence of the great genii, the lords of
Hades, and been found true. No trace of earthly impurity
hath been found in his heart. Now that he
leaveth the tribunal true of voice (justified), his heart is
restored to him, as well as his eyes and the material
cover of his heart, to be put back in their places, each
in its own time, his soul in heaven, his heart in the
other world, as is the custom of the followers of Horus.
Henceforth let his body lie in the hands of Anubis, who
presideth over the tombs; let him receive offerings at
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
the cemetery in the presence of (Osiris) Un-nefer (the
Good Being); let him be as one of those favourites who
follow thee; let his soul abide where it will in the
necropolis of his city, he whose voice is true before
the great Ennead.</q><note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>, p. 191.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the judgment-hall of Osiris we find the first
expression of the doctrine which was echoed so many
ages later by the Hebrew prophets, that what the gods
require is mercy and righteousness rather than orthodoxy
of belief. And the righteousness and mercy are far-reaching.
The faith that is to save the follower of
Osiris is a faith that has led him to feed the hungry, to
give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to abstain
from injuring his neighbour in word or thought, much
less in deed, and to be truthful in both act and speech.
Even the slave is not forgotten; to have done anything
which has caused him to be ill-treated by his master, is
sufficient to exclude the offender from the delights of
paradise. Man's duty towards his fellow-man is put on
a higher footing even than his duty towards the gods,
for it comes first in the list of righteous actions required
from him. It is not until the dead man has proved
that he has acted with justice and mercy towards his
fellows, that he is allowed to pass on to prove that he
has performed his duty towards the gods.
</p>

<p>
And the Osirian confession of faith was not a mere
conventional formulary, without influence on the life and
conduct of those who professed it. There are already
allusions to it in the Pyramid texts, and in the tombs of
a later period the deceased rests his claim to be remembered
upon the good deeds he had done while on
earth. To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, and to
deal justly, are duties which are constantly recognised in
them. <q>I loved my father,</q> says Baba at El-Kab, <q>I
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
honoured my mother.... When a famine arose, lasting
many years, I distributed corn to the needy.</q> The
Egyptian sepulchres contain few records of war and
battles; of deeds of kindness and righteous dealing there
is frequent mention.<note place='foot'>So on a stela translated by Professor Maspero (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>,
iv. p. 128) the deceased says: <q>Never has one said of me, What is that
he hath done? I have not injured, I have not committed evil; none has
suffered through my fault, the lie has never entered into me since I was
born, but I have always done that which was true in the sight of the lord
of the two worlds. I have been united in heart to the god; I have
walked in the good paths of justice, love, and all the virtues. Ah, let
my soul live ... for behold I am come to this land, O souls, to be with
you in the tomb, I am become one of you who detest sin.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Of the fate of the wicked, of those whose hearts
were overweighed in the balance and who failed to
pass the tribunal of Osiris, we know but little. Typhon,
in the form of a hideous hippopotamus, stood behind
Thoth in a corner of the hall, ready to devour their entrails.
In the Book of the Other World, of which I shall have
to speak in another lecture, the tortures of the lost are
depicted quite in medieval style. We see them plunged
in water or burned in the fire, enclosed in vaulted
chambers filled with burning charcoal, with their heads
struck from their necks or their bodies devoured by
serpents. But the Book of the Other World is the ritual
of a religious system which was originally distinct from
the Osirian, and it is probable that most Egyptians
expected the final annihilation of the wicked rather than
their continued existence in an eternal hell. The divine
elements in man, which could not die, were equally
incapable of committing sin, and consequently would
return to the God who gave them, when the human
individuality to which they had been joined was punished
for its offences in the flesh. The soul could
remain united only to that individuality which had been
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
purified from all its earthly stains, and had become as the
god Osiris himself. The individuality which was condemned
in the judgment of Osiris perished eternally,
and in the mind of the Egyptian the individuality and
the individual were one and the same.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VIII. The Sacred Books.</head>

<p>
Like all other organised religions, that of ancient Egypt
had its sacred books. According to St. Clement of Alexandria,
the whole body of sacred literature was contained
in a collection of forty-two books, the origin of which was
ascribed to the god Thoth. The first ten of these <q>Hermetic</q>
volumes were entitled <q>the Prophet,</q> and dealt
with theology in the strictest sense of the term. Then
followed the ten books of <q>the Stolist,</q> in which were to
be found all directions as to the festivals and processions,
as well as hymns and prayers. Next came the fourteen
books of <q>the Sacred Scribe,</q> containing all that was
known about the hieroglyphic system of writing, and the
sciences of geometry and geography, astronomy, astrology,
and the like. These were followed by two books on music
and hymnology; and, finally, six books on the science and
practice of medicine.<note place='foot'>Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> vi. p. 260, ed. Sylb. See Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Einleitung zur
Chronologie der Aegypter</hi>, pp. 45, 46. The remains ascribed to Hermes
Trismegistos, including the Dialogue called <hi rend='italic'>Pœmandres</hi>, have been translated
into English by J. D. Chambers (1882). The Dialogue is already
quoted by Justin Martyr (<hi rend='italic'>Exhort. ad Græcos</hi>, xxxviii.).</note>
</p>

<p>
The Hermetic books were written in Greek, and were
a compilation of the Greek age. Such a systematic epitome
of the learning of ancient Egypt belonged to the
period when Egyptian religion had ceased to be creative,
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
or even progressive, and the antiquarian spirit of Greek
Alexandria had laid hold of the traditions and institutions
of the past. But they were derived from genuine sources,
and represented with more or less exactitude the beliefs
and practices of earlier generations. They were, it is
true, a compilation adapted to Greek ideas and intended
to satisfy the demands of Greek curiosity, but it is no less
true that the materials out of which they were compiled
went back to the remotest antiquity. The temple libraries
were filled with rolls of papyri relating not only to the
minutest details of the temple service, but also to all
the various branches of sacred lore. Among these were
the books which have been called the Bibles of the ancient
Egyptians.
</p>

<p>
Foremost amongst the latter is the Ritual to which
Lepsius gave the name of the Book of the Dead. It was
first discovered by Champollion in the early days of
Egyptian decipherment, and a comparative edition of the
text current during the Theban period has been made by
Dr. Naville. Papyri containing the whole or portions of
it are numberless; the chapters into which it is divided
are inscribed on the coffins, and even on the wrappings of
the dead, as well as on the scarabs and the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebtis</foreign> that
were buried with the mummy. It was, in fact, a sort of
passport and guide-book combined in one, which would
carry the dead man in safety through the dangers that
confronted him in the other world, and bring him at last
to the judgment-hall of Osiris and the paradise of Alu.
It described minutely all that awaited him after death;
it detailed the words and prayers that would deliver him
from his spiritual enemies; and it put into his mouth the
confession he would have to make before the tribunal of
the dead. Without it he would have been lost in the
strange world to which he journeyed, and hence the need
of inscribing at least some portions of it on his tomb or
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
sepulchral furniture, where their ghostly doubles could be
read by his ka and soul.
</p>

<p>
The Book of the Dead was the Bible or Prayer-book
of the Osirian creed. Its universal use marks the triumph
of the worship of Osiris and of the beliefs that accompanied
it. It was for the follower of Osiris that it was
originally compiled; the judgment with which it threatened
him was that of Osiris, the heaven to which it led him
was the field of Alu. The Pyramid texts of the Fifth
and Sixth Dynasties imply that it already existed in some
shape or other; the Osirian creed is known to them in
all its details, and the <q>other world</q> depicted in them
is that of the Book of the Dead.<note place='foot'>The extraordinary care with which the sacred texts were handed
down through long periods of time is illustrated by certain of the Pyramid
texts, which are reproduced word for word down to the close of the
Egyptian monarchy. Thus passages at the beginning of the inscriptions
in the Pyramid of Unas are repeated in the Ritual of Abydos, and another
portion of the same text is found on a stela of the Thirteenth Dynasty,
as well as in one of the courts of the temple of queen Hatshepsu at Dêr
el-Bâhari, where, as Professor Maspero remarks, <q>we have three identical
versions of different epochs and localities.</q> The invocations against
serpents (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 300-339) recur in the tomb of Bak-n-ren-ef of the Twenty-sixth
Dynasty. See Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, iii. pp. 182, 195, 220.
The fact gives us confidence in the statements of the Egyptian scribes,
that such and such chapters of the Book of the Dead had been <q>found</q>
or written in the reigns of certain early kings.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the Book of the Dead is a composite work. Not
only are the religious conceptions embodied in it composite
and sometimes self-contradictory, on the literary
side it is composite also. It was, moreover, a work of
slow growth; glosses have been added to it to explain
passages which had become obscure through the lapse of
time; the glosses have then made their way into the
text, and themselves become the subject of fresh commentary
and explanation. Chapters have been inserted,
paragraphs interpolated, and the later commentary combined
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
with the original text. The Book of the Dead
as it appears in the age of the Theban dynasties had
already passed through long centuries of growth and
modification.<note place='foot'>There is much to be said for the view of Professor Piehl, that we have in
it an amalgamation of the rituals and formulæ of the various chief sanctuaries
of Egypt, which have been thrown side by side without any attempt
at arrangement or harmony. One of such rituals would be that mentioned
on the sarcophagus of Nes-Shu-Tefnut, where we read of <q>the sacred
writings of Horus in the city of Huren</q> in the Busirite nome (<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de
Travaux</hi>, vi. p. 134). On the sarcophagus of Beb, discovered by Professor
Petrie at Dendera, and belonging to the period between the Sixth and
the Eleventh Dynasties, we have not only <q>early versions</q> of parts of the
Book of the Dead, but also chapters which do not occur in the standard
text (Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Dendereh</hi>, 1898, pp. 56-58).</note>
</p>

<p>
The Pyramid texts show the same combination of the
doctrines of the Osirian creed with those of the solar
cult as the Book of the Dead.<note place='foot'>We even read in them of Ra being <q>purified in the fields of Alu</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 411).</note> But the combination is
that of two mutually exclusive systems of theology which
have been brought forcibly side by side without any
attempt being made to fuse them into a harmonious
whole. They display the usual tendency of the Egyptian
mind to accept the new without discarding the old, and
without troubling to consider how the new and old can
be fitted together. It was enough to place them side by
side; those who did not think the Osirian creed sufficient
to ensure salvation, had the choice of the solar creed
offered them with its prayers and incantations to the
sun-god. But it was not an alternative choice; the
heaven of the solar bark in its passage through the world
of the night was attached to the heaven of Alu with its
fields lighted by the sun of day.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that the chapters which introduce the
doctrines of the solar cult are a later addition to the
original Book of the Dead. That was the text-book of
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
the Osirian soul, with whose beliefs the doctrines of the
solar cult were absolutely incompatible. While the one
taught that the dead, without distinction, passed to the
judgment-hall of Osiris, where, after being acquitted, as
much on moral as on religious grounds, they were admitted
to a paradise of light and happiness, the other
maintained that only a chosen few, who were rich and
learned enough to be provided with the necessary theological
formulæ, were received in the solar bark as it
glided along the twelve hours of the night, thus becoming
companions of the sun-god in his passage through a realm
of darkness that was peopled by demoniac forms. The
Osirian and solar creeds issued from two wholly different
religious systems, and the introduction of conceptions
derived from the latter into the Book of the Dead, however
subordinate may be the place which they occupy,
indicates a revision of the original work. It was not
until the book had gained a predominant position in
Egyptian religious thought that it would have been needful
to incorporate into it the ideas of a rival theology.
But the incorporation had taken place long before the
Pyramid texts were compiled, perhaps before the day
when Menes united the two kingdoms of Egypt into
one.
</p>

<p>
There are yet other evidences of a composite theology
in the Book of the Dead. In one chapter we have the
old doctrine of the Ka confined to the dark and dismal
tomb in which its body lies; in another we see the soul
flying whithersoever it will on the wings of a bird, sitting
on the branches of a tree under the shade of the foliage,
or perched on the margin of flowing water. But such
theological inconsistencies probably go back to the age
when the book was first composed. The conceptions of
the Ka and of the soul, however inconsistent they may
be, belong to so early a period, that they lay together
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
at the foundation of Egyptian religious thought long
before the days when an official form of religion had
come into existence, or the Book of the Dead had
been compiled.
</p>

<p>
In some instances it is possible to fix approximately
the period to which particular portions of the book belong.
Professor Maspero has shown that the 64th chapter,
once considered one of the oldest, is in reality one of the
latest in date. It sums up the different formulæ which
enabled the soul of the dead man to quit his body in safety;
and accordingly its title, which, however, varies in different
recensions, is a repetition of that prefixed to the earlier
part of the work, and declares that it makes <q>known in
a single chapter the chapters relating to <emph>going forth from
day</emph>.</q> According to certain papyri, it was <q>discovered</q>
either in the reign of Usaphaes of the First Dynasty or
in that of Men-kau-Ra of the Fourth Dynasty, under the
feet of Thoth in the temple of Eshmunên, written in
letters of lapis-lazuli on a tablet of alabaster. The details
of the <q>discovery</q> are not sufficiently uniform to
allow us to put much confidence in them; the tradition
proves, however, that the Egyptians considered the chapter
to be at least as old as the Fourth Dynasty; and the
belief is supported by the fact that on the monuments of
the Eleventh Dynasty it is already an integral part of the
book. If, then, a chapter which is relatively modern was
nevertheless embodied in the book in the age of the
earlier dynasties, we can gain some idea of the antiquity
to which the book itself must reach back, even in its
composite form.<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, pp. 367-370.</note>
</p>

<p>
The first fifteen chapters, as Champollion perceived,
form a complete whole in themselves. In the Theban
texts they are called the <q>Chapter of going before the
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
divine tribunal of Osiris.</q> In the Saite period this is
replaced by the more general title of <q>Beginning of the
Chapter of <emph>going forth from day</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Various interpretations have been given of the phrase <foreign rend='italic'>per m hru</foreign>. I
have adopted that which seems to me most consonant with both grammar
and logical probability.</note> They describe how
the soul can leave its mummy, can escape forced labour
in the other world through the help of the <foreign rend='italic'>ushebti</foreign>, can
pass in safety <q>over the back of the serpent Apophis, the
wicked,</q> and can acquire that <q>correctness of voice</q>
which will enable it to repeat correctly the words of
the ritual, and so enter or leave at will the world
beyond the grave. The 15th chapter is a hymn to the
Sun.
</p>

<p>
The 17th chapter begins a new section. It sums
up in a condensed form all that the soul was required
to know about the gods and the world to come. But
it has been glossed and reglossed until its first form
has become almost unrecognisable. The commentary
attached to the original passages became in time itself so
obscure as to need explanation, and the chapter now
consists of three strata of religious thought and exposition
piled one on the top of the other. As it now stands it
unites in a common goal the aspirations of the followers
of Osiris and of those of the solar cult; the dead man is
identified with the gods, and so wends his way to the
divine land in which they dwell, whether that be the
fields of Alu or the bark of the Sun.
</p>

<p>
The chapters which follow are intended to restore
voice, memory, and name to the dead man. With the
restoration of his name comes the restoration of his
individuality, for that which has no name has no individuality.
Then follows (in chapters xxvi.-xxx.) the
restoration of his heart, which is regarded first as a mere
organ of the body, and then in the Osirian sense as the
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
equivalent of the conscience. As an organ, the figure of
a heart placed in the tomb was sufficient to ensure its
return; as the living conscience and principle of life,
something of a more mysterious and symbolic nature was
needed. This was found in the scarab or beetle, whose
name <foreign rend='italic'>kheper</foreign> happened to coincide in sound with the word
that signified <q>to become.</q><note place='foot'>The inscribed scarab does not seem to be older than the age of the
Eleventh Dynasty, when it began to take the place of the cylinder as a
seal. At all events there is no authentic record of the discovery of one in
any tomb of an earlier date, and the scarabs with the names of Neb-ka-ra,
Khufu, and other early kings, were for the most part made in the time of
the Twenty-sixth Dynasty. It is possible, however, that some at least of
the scarabs which bear the name of Ra-n-ka of the Eighth Dynasty are
contemporaneous with the Pharaoh whose name is written upon them.
If so, they are the oldest inscribed scarabs with which we are acquainted.
Uninscribed scarabs, however, go back to the prehistoric age. The use
of the scarab as an amulet is already referred to in the Pyramid texts.
And Dr. Reisner has discovered green porcelain beetles in the prehistoric
graves of Negadiyâ, along with other green porcelain amulets, such as
turtles, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a series of chapters the soul is now protected
against the poisonous serpents, including <q>the great
python who devours the ass,</q> which it will meet with in
its passage through the limbo of the other world. As
Professor Maspero remarks, the large place occupied by
these serpents among the dangers which await the soul
on its first exit from the body, make it plain that in the
days when the Book of the Dead was first being compiled,
venomous snakes were far more plentiful than they ever
have been in the Egypt of historical times. Indeed, the
python, whose huge folds are still painted on the walls of
the royal tombs of Thebes, had retired southward long
before the age of the Fourth Dynasty. To an equally
early period we may refer the forty-second chapter, in
which the soul is taught how to escape the slaughter of
the enemies of Horus, which took place at Herakleopolis
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
during the Osirian wars,&mdash;a chapter, however, in which,
it may be observed, the elder Horus is already confounded
with the son of Osiris.<note place='foot'>As is also the case in the Pyramid texts.</note>
</p>

<p>
Chapters xliv. to liii. are occupied in describing how
the dead man is thus preserved from <q>the second death.</q>
Illustrations are drawn both from the punishments
undergone by the enemies of the sun-god in the story
of his passage through the world of night, and from the
old beliefs connected with the lot of the Ka. He was
neither to be beheaded, nor cast head downwards into
the abyss, nor was he to feed on filth like the Ka for
which no offerings of food had been provided. The
dangers from which he is thus preserved are next contrasted
with the joys that await him in the paradise of
the Blest (chs. liv.-lxiii.).
</p>

<p>
The 64th chapter, which sums up the preceding
part of the book, and constitutes a break between it and
what follows, has already been considered. The ten
chapters which succeed it are all similarly concerned
with <q>coming forth from the day.</q> They thus traverse
the same ground as the first fifteen chapters of the book,
but they deal with the subject in a different way and
from a different point of view. They are a fresh proof
of the composite character of the work, and of the desire
of its authors to incorporate in it all that had been
written on the future life of the soul up to the time of
its composition. Professor Maspero believes that they
embody the various formulæ relating to the severance
of soul and body which were current in the priestly
schools.<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, p. 369.</note>
</p>

<p>
Equally separate in tone and spirit are the next six
chapters (lxxv.-xc.), which have emanated from the
school of Heliopolis. They deal with the destiny of the
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
Ba or <q>soul</q> rather than with that of the Osirian, and
describe the transformations which it can undergo if
fortified with the words of the ritual. It may at will
transform itself into a hawk of gold, a lotus flower, the
moon-god or Ptaḥ, even into a viper, a crocodile, or a
goose. But first it must fly to Heliopolis and the solar
deities who reside there, and it is in Heliopolis that its
transformation into the god Ptaḥ is to take place.
</p>

<p>
The next chapter, the 91st, transports us into a
different atmosphere of religious thought. It deals with
the reunion of the soul and the body. But the two
which follow forbid the Egyptian to believe that this
meant a sojourn of the soul in the tomb. On the
contrary, the soul, it is said, is not to be <q>imprisoned</q>;
while the 93rd chapter <q>opens the gates of the
sepulchre to the soul and the shadow (<foreign rend='italic'>khaib</foreign>), that they
may go forth and employ their limbs.</q> And the land
to which they were to go was a land of sunlight.
</p>

<p>
From this point onwards the Book of the Dead is
purely Osirian in character. But beliefs derived from
the solar cult have been allowed to mingle with the
Osirian elements; thus the bark of the sun-god has
been identified with the bark which carried the Osirian
dead to the fields of Alu, and Osiris is even permitted
to assign a place to his faithful servants in the boat of
Ra instead of in the paradise over which he himself
rules. And the Osirian elements themselves belong to
two different periods or two different schools of thought.
In the earlier chapters the paradise of Osiris is gained
like the paradise of Ra, by the magical power of the
words of the ritual and the offerings made by the friends
of the dead; from the 125th chapter onwards the test
of righteousness is a moral one; the dead man has to be
acquitted by his conscience and the tribunal of Osiris
before he can enter into everlasting bliss.
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
The bark which carried the followers of Osiris has
been explained by the Pyramid texts. When the dead
man had ascended to heaven, either by the ladder which
rose from the earth at Hermopolis or in some other way,
he found his path barred by a deep lake or canal.
According to one myth, he was carried across it on the
wings of the ibis Thoth, but the more general belief
provided for him the boat of the ferryman Nu-Urru,<note place='foot'>Maspero, <q>La Pyramide de Pepi 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>er</hi></q> in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, vii. pp.
161, 162. In the Babylonian Epic of Gilgames the place of Nu-Urru is
taken by Ur-Ninnu.</note>
the prototype of the Greek Charon. The fusion of the
Osirian creed with the solar cult, however, caused the
boat of Nu-Urru and the bark of the sun-god to be
confounded together, and accordingly three chapters
(c.-cii.) have been added to that in which the boat
of the Egyptian Charon is referred to, <q>in order
to teach the luminous spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign>) how to enter the
bark among the servants of Ra.</q> In the next
chapter, Hathor, <q>the lady of the west,</q> is the object
of prayer.
</p>

<p>
Two chapters (cv. and cvi.) are now interpolated from
the ritual of Ptaḥ. They take us back to the age when
offerings were made to the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> of the dead and not to
the gods, and declare that abundant food should be given
it <q>each day in Memphis.</q> They have little to do with
the destinies of the Osirian in the paradise of Alu.
These are once more resumed in the 107th chapter: the
fields of Alu are described, and the life led by those who
enjoy them.
</p>

<p>
With the 125th chapter we enter the <q>Hall of the
Two Truths,</q> where Osiris sits on his throne of judgment,
and the soul is justified or condemned for the deeds
it had done in the flesh. It is no longer ceremonial, but
moral purity that is required: the follower of Osiris is
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
to be saved not by the words and prayers of the ritual,
however correctly they may be pronounced, but by his
acts and conduct in this lower world. We are transported
into a new atmosphere, in which religion and
morality for the first time are united in one: the teaching
of the prophet has taken the place of the teaching of
the priest.
</p>

<p>
All the blessings promised to the disciples of other
creeds than the Osirian are now granted to the soul who
has passed unscathed through the hall of judgment. Not
only the fields of Alu are his, but the solar bark as well,
to which the school of Heliopolis looked forward; even
the old belief which confined the Ka to the narrow
precincts of the tomb was not forgotten, and the 132nd
chapter instructs the Osirian how to <q>wander at will to
see his house.</q> Like Osiris himself, he can take part in
the festival of the dead, and share in the offerings that
are presented at it. Free access is allowed him to all
parts of the other world: whatever heaven or hell had
been imagined in the local sanctuaries of Egypt was
open to him to visit as he would.
</p>

<p>
The later chapters of the Book of the Dead take us
back to the earth. They are concerned with the mummy
and its resting-place, with the charms and amulets
which preserved the body from decay, or enabled the
soul to inspire it once more with life. They form
a sort of appendix, dealing rather with the beliefs
and superstitions of the people, than with the ideas
of the theologians, about the gods and the future
life.<note place='foot'>The Book of the Dead has been analysed by Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie
et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, i. pp. 325-387.</note>
</p>

<p>
The order in which I have referred to the chapters
of the book are those of the Theban texts as edited by
Dr. Naville. But it must not be supposed that it constitutes
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
an integral part of the original work. As a
matter of fact there are very few copies of the book,
even among those which belong to the Theban period,
in which anything like all the chapters is to be found.
Indeed, it is difficult to say how many chapters a complete
edition of it ought to contain. Pierret made them
one hundred and sixty-five; the latest editors raise them
to over two hundred. The reason of this is easy to
explain. The separate chapters are for the most part
intended for special purposes or special occasions, and
each, therefore, has had a separate origin. They have
been collected from all sides, and thrown together with
very little attempt at arrangement or order. They
belong to different periods of composition and different
schools of religious thought: some of them mount back
to the remotest antiquity, others are probably even later
than the foundation of the united monarchy. Hence, as
a rule, only a selection of them was inscribed on the
rolls of papyrus that were buried with the dead, or on
the coffin and sepulchral objects deposited in the tomb;
it was only the most important of them that the Osirian
was likely to need in the other world. Indeed, in some
cases only the semblance of a text seems to have been
thought necessary. The copies made for the dead usually
abound with errors, and some have actually been found
in which the text is represented by a number of unmeaning
signs. The Book of the Dead, moreover, was
continually growing. The oldest texts are the shortest
and most simple, the latest are the longest and most
crowded with chapters. As fresh prayers and formulæ
for protecting the dead in the other world, or directing
them on their journey, were discovered in the local
sanctuaries, they were added in the form of chapters;
no precaution, it was felt, should be omitted which might
secure the safety of those who had passed beyond the grave.
</p>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

<p>
The Book of the Dead was thus a growth, and a
growth it remained. It never underwent the systematic
revision which has been the lot of most other sacred
books. We look in it in vain for traces of an individual
editor. And on this account its form and even its
language were never fixed. The prayers and formulæ
it contained were, it is true, stereotyped, for their success
depended on their correct recitation; but beyond this
the utmost latitude was allowed in the way of addition
or change. A Masoretic counting of words and syllables
would have been inconceivable to the Egyptian.
</p>

<p>
In later days, more especially in the Greek period,
the Book of the Dead served as a basis for other religious
compositions which claimed divine authorship, and the
authority due to such an origin. Of these the most
popular was the Book of Respirations (<hi rend='italic'>Shâ-n-Sensenu</hi>),
which derives its inspiration from chapters liv. to lxiii.
of the Book of the Dead, and is ascribed to the god
Thoth. In anticipation of the apocalyptic literature of
the Jews, the writer describes the condition of the soul
in the next world, following closely the indications of
the old ritual, and declaring how the <q>Respirations</q> it
contains were first <q>made by Isis for her brother Osiris
to give life to his soul, to give life to his body, to
rejuvenate all his members anew.</q> The soul of the
Osirian is said to <q>live</q> by means of the book that is
thus provided for him, for he <q>has received the Book of
Respirations, that he may breathe with his soul ...
that he may make any transformation at his will ...
that his soul may go wherever it desireth.</q><note place='foot'>Translated by P. J. de Horrack.</note> We are
reminded in these words of the last chapter of the Book
of Revelation (xxii. 7, 18, 19).
</p>

<p>
The Book of the Dead was the oldest of the sacred
books of Egypt. It was also in universal use. Whatever
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
other articles of belief he may have held, the
Egyptian of the historical age was before all things else
a follower of Osiris. It was as an Osirian that he
hoped to traverse the regions that lay beyond the tomb,
and whose geography and inhabitants were revealed to
him in the Osirian ritual. From this point of view,
accordingly, the Book of the Dead may be termed the
Bible of the Egyptians. But it was not without rivals.
We have seen that even in the Book of the Dead the
heaven of Osiris is not the only heaven to which the
dead may look forward. Osiris has a rival in the sun-god,
and a place in the solar bark seems almost as much
coveted as a place in the fields of Alu. The solar cult
of Heliopolis had indeed to yield to the more popular
cult of Osiris, but it was on condition that the cult of
Osiris recognised and admitted it. To be a follower of
Osiris did not prevent the believing Egyptian from being
also a follower of the god Ra.
</p>

<p>
In the latter part of the Theban period the solar
cult received a fresh impulse and developed a new life.
The attempt of Khu-n-Aten to establish a new faith, the
outward symbol of which was the solar disc, was but an
indication of the general trend of religious thought, and
the Asiatic conquests of the Eighteenth Dynasty introduced
into Egypt the worship and creed of the sun-god
Baal. One by one the gods were identified with Ra;
Amon himself became Amon-Ra, and the local deity of
Thebes passed into a pantheistic sun-god. It was under
these conditions that a new ritual was compiled for the
educated classes of Egypt, or at all events was adopted
by the religion of the State. This was the Book <hi rend='italic'>Am
Duat</hi>, the Book of the Other World.
</p>

<p>
Copies of it are written on the walls of the dark
chambers in the rock-cut labyrinths wherein the kings of
the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties were laid to rest.
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
In the tomb of Seti <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> we find two versions, one in which
the text is given in full, another in which the usual plan
is followed of giving only the last five sections completely,
while extracts alone are taken from the first
seven. The text is profusely illustrated by pictures, in
order that the dead might have no difficulty in understanding
the words of the ritual, or in recognising the
friends and enemies he would meet in the other world.
</p>

<p>
Unlike the Book of the Dead, the Book Am Duat is
a systematic treatise, which bears the stamp of individual
authorship. It is an apocalypse resting on an astronomical
foundation, and is, in fact, a minute and detailed
account of the passage of the sun-god along the heavenly
river Ur-nes during the twelve hours of the night.
Each hour is represented by a separate locality in the
world of darkness, enclosed within gates, and guarded by
fire-breathing serpents and similar monsters. As the
bark of the sun-god glides along, the gates are successively
opened by the magical power of the words
he utters, and their guardians receive him in peace.
Immediately he has passed the gates close behind him,
and the region he has left is once more enveloped in
darkness.
</p>

<p>
But though he is thus able to illuminate for the brief
space of an hour the several regions of the other world,
it is not as the living sun-god of day that he voyages
along the infernal river, but as <q>the flesh of Ra</q>&mdash;that is
to say, as that mortal part of his nature which alone
could die and enter the realm of the dead. The river is
a duplicate of the Nile, with its strip of bank on either
side, its fields and cities, even its nomes, wherein the god,
like the Pharaoh, assigns land and duties to his followers.
For the followers of Ra have a very different lot before
them from that which awaited the followers of Osiris.
There was no land of everlasting light and happiness to
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
which they could look forward, nor was their destiny
hereafter dependent on their conduct in this life. Their
supreme end was to accompany the sun-god in his bark
as he passed each night through the twelve regions of
the dead, and this could be attained only by a knowledge
of the ritual of Am Duat and the mystic formulæ it
contained. Few, however, of those who started with the
sun-god on his nocturnal voyage remained with him to
the last; most of them were stopped in the regions
through which he passed, where fields were granted them
whose produce they might enjoy, and where each night for
a single hour they formed as it were a bodyguard around
the god and lived once more in the light. Even the
kings of Upper and Lower Egypt were condemned to
dwell for ever in this gloomy Hades, along with Osiris
and the Khû or luminous souls of an earlier faith.
Those who were happy enough by virtue of their knowledge
and spells to emerge with Ra into the dawn of a
new day, henceforth had their home in the solar bark, and
were absorbed into the person of the god.
</p>

<p>
But it was not only the friends and followers of Ra
who thus accompanied him in his journey through the
other world; his enemies were there also, and the
horrible punishments they had to endure, as depicted
on the walls of the royal tombs, were worthy of the
imagination of a Dante. The banks of the infernal river
were lined with strange and terrible monsters, some of
them the older deities and spirits of the popular creed,
others mere creations of symbolism, others creatures of
composite form to whose invention the older mythology
contributed. Fire-breathing serpents are prominent
among them, lighting up the darkness for the friends of
Ra, and burning his foes with their poisonous flames.<note place='foot'>For a translation and analysis of the Book of Am Duat, see Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi> ii. pp. 1-163.</note>
</p>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<p>
The artificial character of this picture of the other
world is clear at the first glance. With the pedantic
attention to details which characterised the Egyptian,
every part of it has been carefully elaborated. The
names and forms of the personages who stand on the
banks of the infernal river or enter the boat of Ra, as
with each successive hour he passes into a new region,
are all given; even the exact area of each region is
stated, though the measurements do not agree in all the
versions of the book. But the best proof of its artificial
nature is to be found in a fact first pointed out by
Professor Maspero. Two of the older conceptions of
the other world and the life beyond the grave, which
differed essentially from the solar doctrine, are embedded
in it, but embedded as it were perforce. In the fourth
and fifth hours or regions we have a picture of the
future life as it was conceived by the worshippers of
Sokaris in the primitive days of Memphis; in the sixth
and seventh, the tribunal and paradise of Osiris.
</p>

<p>
The kingdom of Sokaris represented that dreary conception
of an after-existence which was associated with
the ka. Like the mummy, the ka was condemned to
live in the dark chamber of the tomb, whence it crept
forth at night to consume the food that had been offered
to it, and without which it was doomed to perish. Long
before the age when the Book of Am Duat was written,
this primitive belief had passed away from the minds of
men; but the tradition of it still lingered, and had secured
a permanent place in the theological lore of Egypt. It
has accordingly been annexed as it were by the author
of the book, and transformed into two of the regions of
the night through which the solar bark has to pass.
But the terms in which the kingdom of Sokaris had
been described were too stereotyped to be ignored or
altered, and the solar bark is accordingly made to pass
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
above the primitive Hades, the voices of whose inhabitants
are heard rising up in an indistinct murmur though
their forms are concealed from view. A memory is
preserved even of the sandy desert of Giza and Saqqâra,
where the inhabitants of Memphis were buried, and over
which Sokaris ruled as lord of the dead. The realm of
Sokaris is pictured as an enclosure of sand, flanked on
either side by a half-buried sphinx.
</p>

<p>
The author of the Book of Am Duat has dealt with
the heaven of Osiris as he has done with the Hades of
Sokaris. Osiris and his paradise have been transported
bodily to the nocturnal path of the sun-god, and condemned
to receive what little light is henceforth allowed
them from the nightly passage of the solar bark. Thoth
guides the bark to the city which contains the tomb
of Osiris, that mysterious house wherein are the four
human forms of the god. On the way the serpent
Neha-hir has to be overcome; he is but another form
of the serpent Apophis, the enemy of Ra, who thus
takes the place of Set, the enemy of Osiris. When the
sixth region is passed, which is a sort of vestibule to the
<q>retreat</q> of Osiris in the seventh, other enemies of Osiris&mdash;of
whom, however, the Osirian doctrine knew but little&mdash;are
being put to death in true solar fashion. Perhaps
the most noteworthy fact in this description of the
kingdom of Osiris is, that not only all the gods of the
Osirian cycle are relegated to it, including the hawk
Horus, but also the Khû or luminous manes and the
ancient kings of Upper and Lower Egypt. The fact
points unmistakably to the great antiquity of the Osirian
creed. It went back to a time when as yet the
Egyptian monarchy was not united, and when the <foreign rend='italic'>khû</foreign>
or luminous soul held the same place in Egyptian
thought as had been held at an earlier time by the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>
and later by the soul or <foreign rend='italic'>ba</foreign>. So undoubted was the
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
fact that the old Pharaohs of primeval Egypt had died in
the Osirian faith, that the author of the Book of Am
Duat could not disregard it; he was forced to place the
predecessors of a Seti or a Ramses, for whom the book
was copied, in one of the murky regions of the other
world instead of in the solar bark. They had been
followers of Osiris and not of Ra, and there was accordingly
no place for them in the boat of the sun-god.
</p>

<p>
Osiris is thus subordinated to the sun. The god of
the dead is not allowed to rule even in his own domains.
Such light and life as are graciously permitted to him
come from the passing of the solar bark once in each
twenty-four hours. He has lost the bright and happy
fields of Alu, he has had to quit even the judgment-hall
where he decided the lot of man. Osiris and his
creed are deposed to make way for another god with
another and a lower form of doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The fact was so patent, that a second solar apocalypse
was written in order to smooth it away. This was the
Book of the Gates or of Hades, a copy of which is also
inscribed in the tomb of Seti. It differs only in details
from the Book Am Duat; the main outlines of the
latter, with the passage of the solar bark through the
twelve hours or regions of the night, remain unaltered.
But the details vary considerably. The gates which
shut the hours off one from the other become fortified
pylons, guarded by serpents breathing fire. The Hades
of Sokaris is suppressed, and the judgment-hall of
Osiris is introduced between the fifth and sixth hours.
The object of the judgment, however, seems merely the
punishment of the enemies of the god, who are tied
to stakes and finally burned or otherwise put to death
in the eighth hour. Among them appears Set in the
form of a swine, who is driven out of the hall of judgment
by a cynocephalous ape. As for the righteous,
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
they are still allowed to cultivate the fields of the
kingdom of Osiris; but it is a kingdom which is plunged
in darkness except during the brief space of time when
the bark of the sun-god floats through it. Osiris, nevertheless,
is acknowledged as lord of the world of the dead,
in contradistinction to the Book Am Duat, which assigns
him only a portion of it; and when the sun-god emerges
into the world of light at the end of the twelfth hour, it
is by passing through the hands of Nut, the sky, who
stands on the body of Osiris, <q>which encircles the other
world.</q> Nor is the serpent Apophis, the enemy of Ra,
confounded with Set; his overthrow by Tum takes place
in the first hour, before the tribunal of Osiris is reached.
</p>

<p>
The theology of the two books resembles the Taoism
of China in its identification of religion with the knowledge
of magical formulæ. The moral element which
distinguished the Osirian faith has disappeared, and
salvation is made to depend on the knowledge of a
mystical apocalypse. Only the rich and cultivated have
henceforth a chance of obtaining it. And even for them
the prospect was dreary enough. A few&mdash;the innermost
circle of disciples&mdash;might look forward to absorption
into the sun-god, which practically meant a loss of
individuality; for the rest there was only a world of
darkness and inaction, where all that made life enjoyable
to the Egyptian was absent. The author of the Book
of the Gates gives expression to the fact when he tells
us that as the last gate of the other world closes behind
the sun-god, the souls who are left in darkness groan
heavily. To such an end had the learned theology of
Egypt brought both the people and their gods!
</p>

<p>
We need not wonder that under the influence of such
teaching the intellectual classes fell more and more into
a hopeless scepticism, which saw in death the loss of
all that we most prize here below. On the one side,
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
we have sceptical treatises like the dialogue between the
jackal and the Ethiopian cat, where the cat, who represents
the old-fashioned orthodoxy, has by far the worst
of the argument;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue égyptologique</hi>, i. 4, ii. 3 (1880, 1881), where an account of the
demotic story is given by E. Révillout.</note> on the other side, the dirge on the
death of the wife of the high priest of Memphis, which
I have quoted in an earlier lecture&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The underworld is a land of thick darkness,</q></l>
<l>A sorrowful place for the dead.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>They sleep, after their guise, never to awaken.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It was better, indeed, that it should be so than that
they should awaken only to lead the existence which
the Book of Am Duat describes.
</p>

<p>
How far the doctrines of the solar theology extended
beyond the narrow circle in which they originated, it is
difficult to say. In the nature of the case they could
not become popular, as they started from an assumption
of esoteric knowledge. We know that the majority of
the Egyptians continued to hold to the Osirian creed up
to the last days of paganism&mdash;or at all events they
professed to do so&mdash;and as long as the Osirian creed was
retained the moral element in religion was recognised.
In one respect, however, the solar theology triumphed.
The gods of Egypt, including Osiris himself, were identified
with the sun-god, and became forms or manifestations
of Ra. Egyptian religion became pantheistic; the
divinity was discovered everywhere, and the shadowy
and impersonal forms of the ancient deities were mingled
together in hopeless confusion. It seemed hardly to
matter which was invoked, for each was all and all were
each.
</p>

<p>
Gnosticism was the natural daughter of the solar
theology. The doctrine that knowledge is salvation and
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
that the gods of the popular cult are manifestations of
the sun-god, was applied to explain the origin of evil.
Evil became the result of imperfection and ignorance,
necessarily inherent in matter, and arising from the fact
that the creation is due to the last of a long series of
æons or emanations from the supreme God. The æons
are the legitimate descendants of the manifold deities
whom the Egyptian priests had resolved into forms of
Ra, while the identification of evil with the necessary
imperfection of matter deprives it of a moral element,
and finds a remedy for it in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>gnosis</foreign> or <q>knowledge</q>
of the real nature of things. Even the strange monsters
and symbolic figures which play so large a part in the
solar revelation are reproduced in Gnosticism. Abraxas
and the other curiously composite creatures engraved on
Gnostic gems have all sprung from the Books of Am Duat
and the Gates, along with the allegorical meanings that
were read into them. However much the solar school
of theology may have been for the old religion of Egypt
a teaching of death, in the Gnosticism of the first
Christian centuries it was born anew.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture IX. The Popular Religion Of Egypt.</head>

<p>
Thus far I have dealt with the official religion of
ancient Egypt, with the religion of the priests and
princes, the scribes and educated classes. This is
naturally the religion of which we know most. The
monuments that have come down to us are for the
most part literary and architectural, and enshrine the
ideas and beliefs of the cultivated part of the community.
The papyri were written for those who could read and
write, the temples were erected at the expense of the
State, and the texts and figures with which they were
adorned were engraved or painted on their walls under
priestly direction. The sculptured and decorated tomb,
the painted mummy-case, the costly sarcophagus, the roll
of papyrus that was buried with the dead, were all alike
the privilege of the wealthy and the educated. The grave
that contained the body of the poor contained little else
than the coarse cere-cloths in which it was wrapped.
Our knowledge, therefore, of the religion of the people,
of the popular religion as distinguished from the religion
of official orthodoxy, is, and must be, imperfect. We
have to gather it from the traces it has left in the
religion of the State, from stray references to it in
literature, from a few rare monuments which have come
down to us, from its survivals in the modern folk-lore
and superstitions of Egypt, or from its influence on the
decaying faith of the classical age.
</p>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<p>
There was, however, a popular religion by the side of
the official religion, just as there is in all countries which
possess an organised faith. And if it is difficult to
understand fully the religion of the uneducated classes
in Western Europe to-day, or to realise their point of
view, it must be much more difficult to do so in the
case of ancient Egypt. Here our materials are scanty,
and the very fact that we know as much as we do about
the religion of the upper class makes it additionally
harder to estimate them aright.
</p>

<p>
A considerable portion of the fellahin were descended
from the earlier neolithic population of Egypt, whom the
Pharaonic Egyptians found already settled in the country.
In a former lecture I have endeavoured to show that
they were fetish-worshippers, and that among their
fetishes animals were especially prominent. They had
no priests, for fetishism is incompatible with a priesthood
in the proper sense of the term. Neither did they
embalm their dead; all those beliefs and ideas, therefore,
which were connected with a priesthood and the practice
of embalming must have come to them from without;
the gods and sacerdotal colleges of the State religion, the
Osirian creed, and the belief in the resurrection, must
have been for them of foreign origin. And of foreign
origin they doubtless remained to the bulk of the nation
down to the last days of paganism.
</p>

<p>
Amon and Ra and Osiris were indeed familiar names, the
temple festivals were duly observed, and the processions
in honour of the State gods duly attended; and after the
age of the Eighteenth Dynasty, when the fusion between
the different elements in the population was completed,
the practice of mummification became general; but the
names of the State gods were names only, to which the
peasant attached a very different meaning from that
which official orthodoxy demanded. He still worshipped
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
the tree whose shady branches arose on the edge of the
desert or at the corner of his field, or brought his offerings
to some animal, in which he saw not a symbol or an
incarnation of Horus and Sekhet, but an actual hawk
and cat.
</p>

<p>
How deeply rooted this belief in the divinity of
animals was in the minds of the people, is shown by the
fact that the State religion had to recognise it just as
Mohammed had perforce to recognise the sanctity of the
<q>Black Stone</q> of the Kaaba. As we have seen, the
second king of the Second Thinite Dynasty is said to
have legalised the worship of the bull Apis of Memphis,
Mnevis of Heliopolis, and the ram of Mendes; and
though the official explanation was that these animals
were but incarnations of Ptaḥ and Ra to whom the
worship was really addressed, it was an explanation
about which the people neither knew nor cared. The
divine honours they paid to the bulls and ram were
paid to the animals themselves, and not to the gods of
the priestly cult.
</p>

<p>
Here and there a few evidences have been preserved
to us that such was the fact. In the tomb of Ra-zeser-ka-seneb,
for instance, at Thebes, the artist has introduced
a picture of a peasant making his morning prayer
to a sycamore which stands at the end of a corn-field,
while offerings of fruit and bread and water are placed
on the ground beside it.<note place='foot'>Scheil, <q>Tombeaux thébains</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Mission archéologique
française du Caire</hi>, v. 4, pl. 4.</note> The official religion endeavoured
to legalise this old tree worship much in the same
way as Christianity endeavoured to legalise the old
worship of springs, by attaching the tree to the service
of a god, and seeing in it one of the forms in which the
deity manifested himself. Thus <q>the sycamore of the
south</q> became the body of Hathor, whose head was
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
depicted appearing from its branches, while opposite
Siût it was Hor-pes who took the goddess's place.<note place='foot'>So in the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 170) reference is made to <q>the <foreign rend='italic'>baqt</foreign>,</q> or
<q>ben-nut tree which is in On.</q> The tree is the <foreign rend='italic'>Moringa aptera Gærtner</foreign>,
from the fruit of which the myrobalanum oil was extracted (Joret, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Plantes dans l'Antiquité et au Moyen Age</hi>, i. pp. 133, 134).</note>
Like other beliefs and practices which go back to the
neolithic population of Egypt, the ancient tree worship
is not yet extinct. On either side of the Nile sacred
trees are to be found, under which the offering of bread
and water is still set, though the god of the official cult
of Pharaonic Egypt, to whom the worship was nominally
paid, has been succeeded by a Mohammedan saint. By
the side of the tree often rises the white dome of the
tomb of a <q>shêkh,</q> to whom the place is dedicated,
reminding us of a picture copied by Wilkinson in a
sepulchre at Hû, in which a small chapel, representing
the tomb of Osiris, stands by the side of a tree on
whose branches is perched the <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> or phœnix.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ancient Egyptians</hi>, iii. p. 349. The <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> is described as <q>the soul
of Osiris.</q></note> The
most famous of these trees, however, that of Matarîya,
is an object of veneration to the Christian rather than
to the Mohammedan. The Holy Family, it is said, once
rested under its branches during their flight into Egypt;
in reality it represents a sycamore in which the soul of
Ra of Heliopolis must have been believed to dwell.
</p>

<p>
Professor Maspero has drawn attention to certain
stelæ in the museum of Turin, which show how, even
in the lower middle class, it was the animal itself and
not the official god incarnated in it that was the object
of worship. On one of them, which belongs to the age
of the Eighteenth Dynasty, huge figures of a swallow
and a cat are painted, with a table of offerings standing
before them, as well as two kneeling scribes, while the
accompanying inscriptions tell us that it was to <q>the
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
good</q> swallow and the <q>good</q> cat, and not to any of
the State gods who may have hidden themselves under
these animal forms, that flowers were being offered and
prayers made. On another stela we find two pet cats,
who are sitting on a shrine and facing one another, and
whom their mistresses&mdash;two of the women who wailed
at funerals&mdash;adore in precisely the same language as
that which was used of Osiris or Amon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, ii. p. 395 sqq.</note> In the
quarries north of Qurna is a similar representation of
a cow and a cobra, which stand face to face with a
table of offerings between them, while a worshipper
kneels at the side, and a half-obliterated inscription
contains the usual formulæ of adoration.<note place='foot'>The influence of the State religion is visible in the picture, as the cow
has the solar disc between its horns, and the cobra is crowned not only
with horns, but also with the solar disc. Behind the cobra is the leafy
branch of a tree. There is no reason for supposing with Wiedemann
(<hi rend='italic'>Muséon</hi>, 1884) that the monument is Ethiopian: what is decipherable in
the inscription is purely Egyptian. Professor Wiedemann calls the animal
on the left a ram, but my drawing made it a cow. At the feet of the
cow, which has a garland round the neck, are two vases.</note> Still more
curious is a stela, now in the museum of Cairo, on
which an ox is represented inside a shrine, while underneath
it is a Greek inscription declaring that the
<q>Kretan</q> who had dedicated the monument could
interpret dreams, thanks to the commandment of <q>the
god.</q> The god, it will be noticed, is not Apis, but an
ordinary ox.
</p>

<p>
But of all the animals who thus continued to be the
real gods of the people in spite of priestly teaching and
State endowments, none were so numerous or were so
universally feared and venerated as the snakes. The
serpent was adored where Amon was but a name, and
where Ra was looked upon as belonging, like fine horses
and clothes, to the rich and the mighty. The prominence
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
of the serpent in Egyptian mythology and symbolism
indicates how plentiful and dangerous it must have been
in the early days of Egypt, and what a lasting impression
it made upon the native mind. When the banks of the
Nile were an uninhabitable morass, and the neolithic
tribes built their huts in the desert, the snake must
indeed have been a formidable danger. The most deadly
still frequent the desert; it is only in the cultivated
land that they are comparatively rare. In Egypt, as
elsewhere, the cultivation of the soil and the habits of
civilised life have diminished their number, and driven
them into the solitudes of the wilderness. But when
the Pharaonic Egyptians first arrived in the valley of
the Nile, when the swamps were being drained, the
jungle cleared away, and the land sown with the wheat
of Babylonia, the serpent was still one of the perils of
daily life. A folk-tale which has been appropriated and
spoilt by the priestly compilers of the legend of Ra, tells
how the sun-god was bitten by a venomous snake which
lay in his path, and how the poison ran through his
veins like fire. The symbol of royalty adopted by the
earliest Pharaohs was the cobra; it symbolised the irresistible
might and deadly power of the conquering chieftain
which, like the dreaded cobra of the desert, overcame
the inhabitants of the country, and compelled them to
regard him with the same awe and terror as the serpent
itself.
</p>

<p>
Down to the last the embalmers and gravediggers and
others who had to attend to the funeral arrangements of
the dead, and consequently lived in the neighbourhood of
the necropolis, were more exposed to the chances of
snake-bite than the inhabitants of the cultivated land.
The necropolis was invariably in the desert, and the
nature of their occupation obliged them to excavate the
sand or visit the dark chambers of the dead where the
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
snake glided unseen. It is not surprising, therefore,
that the veneration of the snake was especially strong
among the population of the cemeteries. Those who
inhabited the necropolis of Thebes have left us prayers
and dedications to the goddess Mert-seger, who is represented
as a cobra or some equally deadly serpent,
though at times she is decently veiled under the name
of an official deity. Once her place is taken by two
snakes, at another time by a dozen of them. She was,
in fact, the tutelary goddess of the necropolis, and hence
received the title of <q>the Western Crest</q>&mdash;that is to say,
the crest of the western hills, where the earliest tombs
of Thebes were situated. Professor Maspero has translated
an interesting inscription made in her honour by
one of the workmen employed in the cemetery. <q>Adoration
to the Western Crest,</q> it begins, <q>prostrations before
her double! I make my adoration, listen! Ever since I
walked on the earth and was an attendant in the Place
of Truth (the cemetery), a man, ignorant and foolish,
who knew not good from evil, I committed many sins
against the goddess of the Crest, and she punished me.
I was under her hand night and day; while I cowered
on the bed like a woman with child, I cried for breath,
and no breath came to me, for I was pursued by the
Western Crest, the mightiest of all the gods, the goddess
of the place; and behold I will declare to all, great and
small, among the workmen of the necropolis: Beware of
the Crest, for there is a lion in her, and she strikes like
a lion that bewitches, and she is on the track of all who
sin against her! So I cried to my mistress, and she
came to me as a soft breeze, she united herself with me,
causing me to feel her hand; she returned to me in
peace, and made me forget my troubles by giving me
breath. For the Western Crest is appeased when the
cry is made to her;&mdash;so says Nefer-ab, the justified.
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
He says: Behold, hear, all ears who live on earth, beware
of the Western Crest!</q><note place='foot'>See the very interesting study of Maspero on <q>La Déesse Miritskro et
ses guérisons miraculeuses</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie</hi>, ii.
pp. 402-419; <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, ii. p. 109 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is clear that Nefer-ab suffered from asthma, that
he believed it had been inflicted upon him by the local
goddess for some sin he had committed against her, and
that he further believed his penitence and cry for help
to have induced her to come to him and cure him.
And this goddess was a snake. Here, in the necropolis
of Thebes, therefore, the snake played the same part as
a healer that it did in the worship of Asklêpios. It will
be remembered that the first temple raised to Æsculapius
at Rome was built after a plague, from which the
city was supposed to have been delivered by a serpent
hidden in the marshes of the Tiber. The serpent that
destroys also heals; by the side of Kakodæmon there is
also the good snake Agathodæmon.
</p>

<p>
Mert-seger, the serpent of the necropolis, did not
wholly escape the patronage of the State religion. Like
the local cults of aboriginal India over which Braḥmanism
has thrown its mantle, the cult of Mert-seger
was not left wholly unnoticed by the organised religion
of the State. A chapel was erected to her in the
orthodox form, and it is from this chapel that most of
the stelæ have come which have revealed the existence
of the old worship. In some of them Mert-seger is
identified with Mut, or even with Isis; but such an
identification was never accepted or understood by her
illiterate worshippers. For them she continued to be
what she had been to their forefathers, simply a serpent
and nothing more. The old faith has survived centuries
of Christianity and Mohammedanism in a modified form.
Professor Maspero discovered that the local Mohammedan
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
saint, whose tomb is not far from the ancient chapel of
Mert-seger, is still believed to work miracles of healing.
He has taken the place of the serpent goddess; that is
all.<note place='foot'>The Belmore collection of Egyptian antiquities contains several stelæ
which commemorate the popular worship of the serpent; see <hi rend='italic'>Belmore
Collection</hi>, pls. 7, 8, and 12. In one of them the uræus has the human
head of the official deity; in another it stands on the top of a shrine;
but on one (given in pl. 7) the worshipper is kneeling before a coluber of
great length, which has none of the attributes of the State gods, and
whose numerous coils remind us of Apophis.</note>
</p>

<p>
The serpent, however, was not always venerated because
it was feared. It lived underground, and was thus,
in a special sense, the oldest inhabitant of the land, and
the guardian of the soil. The Telmessians told Krœsus
that it was <q>a child of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Herodotos, i. 78.</note> The harmless
snakes that frequent the village houses of modern
Egypt are still regarded as the <q>protectors</q> of the
household. The bowl of milk is provided for them as
regularly as it once was in Wales for the fairies, and
many tales are told of the punishment a neglect of the
household <foreign rend='italic'>ḥarrâs</foreign> or <q>guardian</q> will entail. For its
poison continues to exist, though held in reserve, and is
communicable by other means than the fangs. At
Helwân near Cairo, for instance, I was told of one of
these guardian snakes which once missed its female mate
and supposed it had been killed. Thereupon it crept
into the <foreign rend='italic'>zîr</foreign> or jar in which water is kept, and poisoned
the water in it. But the female having soon afterwards
made its appearance, it was observed to glide into a
basin of milk, then to crawl along the ground so that
the clotted dust might adhere to its body, and again to
enter the <foreign rend='italic'>zîr</foreign>. As the dust fouled the water, the people
of the house knew that the latter must have been
poisoned, and accordingly poured it on the ground. In
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
this case the snake provided the remedy for the mischief
it had the power to cause.<note place='foot'>Sayce, <q>Serpent Worship in Ancient and Modern Egypt,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Contemporary
Review</hi>, Oct. 1893.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the Agathodæmon or serpent guardian of the
house not only still survives among the fellahin of
Egypt, serpent worship still holds undiminished sway
in the valley of the Nile. In a crater-like hollow of the
mountain cliff of Shêkh Herîdî there are two domed
tombs, dedicated not to a Christian or a Mohammedan
saint, but to a snake and his female mate. Shêkh
Herîdî, in fact, is a serpent, and the place he inhabits is
holy ground. Pilgrimages are made annually to it, and
the festival of the <q>Shêkh,</q> which takes place in the
month that follows Ramadan, is attended by crowds of
sailors and other devout believers, who encamp for days
together in the neighbourhood of the shrine.
</p>

<p>
They have no doubt about the miraculous powers
possessed by the snake. It is as thick as a man's thigh,
and, if treated irreverently, breathes flames of fire into
the face of the spectator, who immediately dies. If it is
cut in pieces, the pieces reunite of their own accord,
and the blood flowing from them marks a spot where
gold is hidden in the ground.
</p>

<p>
Paul Lucas, in the early part of the eighteenth
century, tells us that in his time it was called <q>the
angel,</q> and that shortly before his visit to the Nile it had
cured a woman of Ekhmîm of paralysis, from which she
had suffered for eight years, by simply crawling up into
her litter when she was brought to its dwelling-place.
Paul Lucas himself was a witness of its supernatural
gifts. It was brought to him by the keeper of the
shrine when he was visiting a Bey on the opposite side
of the river. Suddenly it disappeared, and was nowhere
to be found; but a messenger, who was sent post haste
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
to the shrine, returned with the information that <q>the
angel was already there, and had advanced more than
twenty steps to meet the dervish who takes care of it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Voyage du Sieur Paul Lucas, fait en mdccxiv etc., par Ordre de
Louis XIV.</hi>, ii. pp. 83-86.</note>
</p>

<p>
Norden, a few years later, has a similar tale to relate.
He was told that the serpent-saint <q>never dies,</q> and
that it <q>cures and grants favours to all those who
implore its aid and offer sacrifices to it.</q> The cures
were effected by the mere presence of the snake, which
came in person to those who desired its help. The
Christians, he adds, admit the miraculous powers of the
Shêkh equally with the Mohammedans, only they explain
them as due to a demon who clothes himself in
a serpent's form.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'Égypte et de Nubie</hi>, nouv. édit. par L. Langlés, ii. pp.
64-69.</note>
</p>

<p>
Saint or demon, however, Shêkh Herîdî is really the
lineal descendant of a serpent which has been worshipped
in its neighbourhood since the prehistoric days
of Egypt. A bronze serpent with the head of Zeus
Serapis has been found in the mounds of Benâwît, on
the western side of the Nile, which face the entrance to
the shrine of the Shêkh; and the nome in which the
shrine is situated was that of Du-Hefi, <q>the mountain of
the snake.</q> The serpent of Shêkh Herîdî, with his
miraculous powers of healing, must thus have been
already famous in the days when the nomes of Upper
Egypt first received their names. The old neolithic
population of the desert must have already venerated
the snake that dwelt in the cleft of the rock above
which now rises the sacred <q>tomb</q> of Shêkh Herîdî.<note place='foot'>See my article on <q>Serpent Worship in Ancient and Modern Egypt,</q> in
the <hi rend='italic'>Contemporary Review</hi>, Oct. 1893. On a rock called Hagar el-Ghorâb, a
few miles north of Assuan, I have found <foreign rend='italic'>graffiti</foreign> of the age of the Twelfth
Dynasty, which show that a chapel of <q>the living serpent</q> stood on the
spot; and a native informed me that the rock is still haunted by a
monstrous serpent, <q>as long as an oar and as thick as a man,</q> which
appears at night and destroys, with the fire that blazes from its eyes,
whoever is unfortunate enough to fall in its way. See <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de
Travaux</hi>, xvi. p. 174.</note>
</p>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
The faith of the people dies hard. The gods and
goddesses, the theology and speculations of the official
religion of Egypt, have passed away, but the old beliefs
and superstitions which were already in possession of the
land when the Pharaonic Egyptians first entered it, have
survived both Christianity and Mohammedanism. The
theological systems of Heliopolis or Thebes are like the
sacred trees, which, according to Dr. Schweinfurth,<note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</hi>, 1889,
No. 7.</note> were
brought from Southern Arabia along with the deities
with whose cult they were associated; when the deities
themselves ceased to be worshipped, the trees also ceased
to be cultivated, and so disappeared from a soil wherein
they had been but exotics. But the religion of the great
mass of the people remained rooted as it were in the
soil, like the palm or the acacia. It flowed like a strong
current under the surface of the theology of the State,
contemptuously tolerated by the latter, and in its turn
but little affected by it. The theology of the State
might incorporate and adapt the beliefs of the multitude;
to the multitude the State theology was a <q>tale of little
meaning, though the words were strong.</q>
</p>

<p>
If we would know what the bulk of the people thought
of those deities whom the higher classes regarded as
manifestations of a single ineffable and omnipotent divine
power, we must turn to the folk-tales which were taken
up and disfigured by the rationalising priests of a later
period, when they combined together in a connected
story all that had been said about the gods of the local
sanctuaries. Each sanctuary came to possess its euhemerising
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
legend of the chief divinity to whom it was consecrated;
the divinity was transformed into an earthly
king, and his history was concocted partly out of popular
tales, associated for the most part with particular relics
and charms, partly from forced etymologies of proper
names. At how early a date these artificial legends first
came into existence we do not know, but we already
meet with examples of them in the time of the Nineteenth
and Twentieth Dynasties. They belong, however,
to the age when the rationalistic process of resolving the
gods into human princes had already begun,&mdash;the counter
side of the process that had turned the Pharaoh into a
god,&mdash;and their artificial character is betrayed by the
attempt to extract history from learned but unscientific
explanations of the origin of local and other names.
</p>

<p>
Here, for instance, is one which was compiled for the
temple of the sun-god at Heliopolis, and is contained in
a Turin papyrus of the age of the Twentieth Dynasty:
<q rend='pre'>Account of the god who created himself, the creator of
heaven, of earth, of the gods, of men, of wild beasts, of
cattle, of reptiles, of fowls, and of fish; the king of men
and gods, to whom centuries are but as years; who
possesses numberless names which no man knoweth, no,
not even the gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Isis was a woman, more knowing in her malice than
millions of men, clever among millions of the gods, equal
to millions of spirits, to whom as unto Ra nothing was
unknown either in heaven or upon earth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The god Ra came each day to sit upon his throne; he
had grown old, his mouth trembled, his slaver trickled
down to the earth, and his saliva dropped upon the
ground. Isis kneaded it with her hand along with the
dust that had adhered to it; she moulded therefrom a
sacred serpent, to which she gave the form of a spear-shaft.
She wound it not about her face, but flung it on
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
the road along which the great god walked, as often as
he wished, in his twofold kingdom.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The venerable god went forth, the (other) gods accompanied
him, he walked along as on other days. Then
the sacred serpent bit him. The divine god opened his
mouth, and his cry rang to heaven. His Ennead of gods
called: <q>What is it?</q> and the gods cried, <q>Look there!</q>
He could make no answer, his jaws chattered, his limbs
shook, the venom took hold of his flesh as the Nile
covers its banks (with water).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When the heart of the great god was quieted, he
called to his followers: <q>Come to me, ye children of my
limbs, ye gods who have emanated from me! Something
painful hath hurt me; my heart perceiveth it, yet my
eyes see it not; my hand hath not wrought it, nothing
that I have made knoweth what it is, yet have I never
tasted suffering like unto it, and there is no pain which is
worse.... I went forth to see what I had created, I
was walking in the two lands which I have made, when
something stung me which I knew not. Was it fire,
was it water? My heart is in flames, my limbs tremble,
all my members shiver. Let there be brought unto me
the children of the gods of beneficent words, who have
understanding mouths, and whose power reaches unto
heaven.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The children of the gods came, full of woe; Isis came
with her magic; with her mouth full of the breath of
life, whose recipes destroy pain, whose word gives life to
the dead. She said: <q>What is it, what is it, O father of
the gods? A serpent hath wrought this suffering in thee,
one of thy creatures hath lifted up his head against thee.
Surely he shall be overthrown by beneficent incantations;
I will make him retreat at the sight of thy rays.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The holy god opened his mouth: <q>I walked along the
road, travelling through the two lands of the earth, after
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
the desire of my heart, that I might see what I had
created; then was I bitten by a serpent that I saw not.
Is it fire, is it water? I am colder than water, I am
hotter than fire, all my limbs sweat, I tremble, my eye
is unsteady, I see not the sky, drops roll from my face
as in the season of summer.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Isis replied to Ra: <q>O tell me thy name, father of
the gods, then shall he live who is released (from pain)
by thy name.</q> But Ra answers: <q>I have created
heaven and earth, I have set the hills in order, and made
all beings that are thereon. I am he who created the
water, and caused the primeval ocean to issue forth. I
created the spouse of his (divine) mother. I created the
heavens and the secrets of the two horizons, and have
ordered the souls of the gods. I am he who illuminates
all things at the opening of his eyes; if he closes his
eyes, all is dark. The water of the Nile rises when he
bids it; the gods know not his name. I make the hours
and create the days, I send the year and create the
inundation, I make the fire that lives, I purify the house.
I am Khepera in the morning, Ra at noon, and Tum at
evening.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The venom departed not, it advanced further, the
great god became no better. Then Isis said to Ra:
<q>Thy name was not pronounced in the words thou hast
repeated. Tell it to me and the poison will depart;
then shall he live whose name is (thus) named.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The poison glowed like fire; it was hotter than the
flame of fire. The majesty of Ra said: <q>I grant thee
leave that thou shouldest search within me, O mother
Isis! and that my name pass from my bosom into
thine.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So the god hid himself from the (other) gods; his
everlasting bark was empty. When the moment arrived
for extracting the heart (whereon the name was written),
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
Isis said to her son Horus: <q>He must yield up unto
thee his two eyes (the sun and moon).</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So the name of the great god was taken from him,
and Isis, the great enchantress, said: <q>Depart, O poison,
leave Ra: let the eye of Horus go forth from the god
and shine out of his mouth. I, I have done it; I throw
on the earth the victorious poison, for the name of the
great god is extracted from him. Let Ra live and the
poison die!</q> So spake Isis, the great one, the regent of
the gods, who knows Ra and his true name.</q>
</p>

<p>
The writer of the papyrus adds that the recital of this
legend is an excellent charm against the poison of a
snake, especially if it is written and dissolved in water,
which is then drunk by the patient; or if it is inscribed
on a piece of linen, and hung around his neck.<note place='foot'>The legend was first published by Pleyte and Rossi, <q>Les Papyrus
hiératiques de Turin,</q> pls. 31, 77, 131-8. It was translated by Lefébure
in the <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache</hi>, 1883, pp. 27-33.</note>
</p>

<p>
The contrast is striking between the introduction to
the legend and the euhemeristic spirit that elsewhere
prevails in it, and can be explained, even in the case of
such disregarders of consistency as the Egyptians, only
on the supposition that the Ra of folk-lore and the Ra
of theology were held to be the same merely in name.
Not even a pretence is made of regarding Isis as a
goddess; she is simply a common witch, who resorts to
magic in order to force Ra to hand over his name and
therewith his powers to her son Horus. The virtue of
the name, and the power conferred by a knowledge of it,
are features common to the folk-lore of most countries.
They take us back to that primitive phase of thought
which not only identifies the name with the person or
thing it represents, but makes it a separate entity with
an existence of its own.
</p>

<p>
The legend of the sun-god of Edfu is equally instructive,
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
though in its present form it is not earlier than the
Ptolemaic age. This begins as follows: <q rend='pre'>In the three
hundred and sixty-third year of the reign of Ra-Harmakhis,
the ever-living, Ra was in Nubia with his
soldiers. Enemies, however, conspired (<foreign rend='italic'>uu</foreign>) against him;
hence the country has ever since borne the name of the
land of Conspirators (<foreign rend='italic'>Uaua</foreign>). Then the god Ra went
his way in his bark along with his followers, and landed
in the nome of Edfu. Here the god Hor-Beḥudet (the
winged disc) entered the bark of Ra and said to his
father: <q>O Harmakhis, I see how the enemy have conspired
against their lord.</q> Then said the Majesty of
Ra-Harmakhis to the person of Hor-Beḥudet: <q>O son of
Ra, exalted one, who hast emanated from me, smite the
enemy before thee forthwith.</q> Hor-Beḥudet flew up to
the sun in the form of a great winged disc; on that
account he is ever since called the great god, the lord of
heaven. He espied the enemy from the sky, he followed
them in the form of a great winged disc. Through the
attack which he made upon them in front, their eyes
saw no longer, their ears heard no longer, each slew his
neighbour forthwith, there remained not one alive. Then
Hor-Beḥudet came in a many-coloured form as a great
winged disc into the bark of Ra-Harmakhis. And Thoth
said to Ra: <q>Lord of the gods, the god of Beḥudet (Edfu)
has come in the form of a great winged disc: from this
day forth he shall be called Hor-Beḥudet (Horus of Edfu).</q>
And he said (again): <q>From this day forth the city of
Edfu shall be called the city of Hor-Beḥudet.</q> Then Ra
embraced the form of Hor, and said to Hor-Beḥudet:
<q>Thou makest the water of Edfu (red with blood like)
grapes, and thy heart is rejoiced thereat.</q> Hence this
water of Edfu is called (the water of grapes).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And Hor-Beḥudet said: <q>March on, O Ra, and
behold thine enemies under thy feet in this land.</q>
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
When the Majesty of Ra had turned back, and the
goddess Astartê with him, he saw the enemy lying on
the ground, each extended like a prisoner. Then said
Ra to Hor-Beḥudet: <q>That is a suitable life.</q> Hence
the seat of Hor-Beḥudet has ever since been called the
place of the Suitable Life. And Thoth said: <q>It was a
piercing (<foreign rend='italic'>deb</foreign>) of my enemies.</q> So the nome of Edfu
(<foreign rend='italic'>Deb</foreign>) has been called ever since by that name. And
Thoth said to Hor-Beḥudet: <q>Thou art a great protection</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>mâk âa</foreign>). Great in Protection (<foreign rend='italic'>âa mâk</foreign>) accordingly
has the sacred bark of Horus been ever since
called.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then Ra spake to the gods who were with him: <q>Let
us voyage (<foreign rend='italic'>khen</foreign>) in our bark on the Nile; we are rejoiced,
for our enemies lie on the ground.</q> The (canal)
in which the great god was has ever since been called
the Water of Voyaging (<foreign rend='italic'>Pe-khen</foreign>).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then the enemies of Ra entered the water: they
changed themselves into crocodiles and hippopotamuses.
But Harmakhis voyaged on the water in his bark.
When the crocodiles and hippopotamuses came up to
him, they opened their jaws in order to destroy the
Majesty of Harmakhis. Then came Hor-Beḥudet with
his followers the blacksmiths (<foreign rend='italic'>mesniu</foreign>); each held an iron
lance and chain in his hand, wherewith he smote the
crocodiles and the hippopotamuses. Then three hundred
and eighty-one of the enemy were brought to the spot,
who had been killed in sight of the city of Edfu.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And Harmakhis said to Hor-Beḥudet: <q>Let my image
be in Southern Egypt, since there it is that the victory
was gained</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nekht âḥ</foreign>). So the dwelling-place of
Hor-Beḥudet (at Edfu) has ever since been called the
Victorious (<foreign rend='italic'>Nekht-âḥ</foreign>). And Thoth said, when he had
seen the enemy lying on the ground: <q>Glad are your
hearts, O gods of heaven; glad are your hearts, O gods of
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
earth! Horus the younger is come in peace; he has
wrought wonders in his journey which he undertook in
accordance with the Book of the Slaying of the Hippopotamus.</q>
Ever since was there (at Edfu) a forge
(<foreign rend='italic'>mesen</foreign>) of Horus.<note place='foot'>The shrine of Horus, whom the legend here identifies with the son of
Osiris, was called Mesen at Edfu. The winged solar disc, which seems to
have originated there, is called sometimes <q>the lord of the city of
Beḥudet,</q> sometimes <q>the lord of the city of Mesen.</q> Beḥudet was
formerly read Hud, and it is possible that this was really the pronunciation
of the name in later days. At all events it seems to be the origin of
the modern Edfu, which, of course, has nothing to do with the verb <foreign rend='italic'>deb</foreign>,
<q>to pierce.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hor-Beḥudet changed his form into that of a winged
solar disc, which remained there above the prow of the
bark of Ea. He took with him Nekheb, the goddess of
the south, and Uazit, the goddess of the north, in the
form of two serpents, in order to annihilate the enemy
in their crocodile and hippopotamus bodies in every
place to which he came, both in Southern and in Northern
Egypt.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then the enemy fled before him, they turned their
faces towards the south, their hearts sank within them
from fear. But Hor-Beḥudet was behind them in the
bark of Ra, with an iron lance and chain in his hand.
With him were his followers, armed with weapons and
chains. Then beheld he the enemy towards the south-east
of Thebes in a plain two schœni in size.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here follows an account of the several battles which
drove the enemies of Horus from place to place until
eventually all Egypt passed under his sway. The first
battle, that which took place south-east of Thebes, was
at Aa-Zadmi, so called from the <q>wounds</q> inflicted on
the foe, which henceforth bore the sacred name of
Hât-Ra, <q>the House of Ra.</q> The second was at Neter-khadu,
<q>the divine carnage,</q> to the north-east of
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
Dendera; the third at Hebnu, near Minia, in the nome
of the Gazelle; and others followed at Oxyrrhynchus or
Beḥnesa, and Herakleopolis or Aḥnas, where a twofold
Mesen or <q>Forge</q> was established. Then the foe were
driven through the Delta and defeated at Zaru on its
eastern frontier, whence they fled in ships down the Red
Sea, but were finally overthrown at Shas-ḥer, near the
later Berenikê, at the end of the road that led across the
desert from the Nile.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, on the 7th of Tybi, their leader <q rend='pre'>Set
had come forward and cried horribly, uttering curses
upon the deed of Hor-Beḥudet in slaying the enemy.
And Ra said to Thoth: <q>The horrible one cries loudly
on account of what Hor-Beḥudet has done against him.</q>
Thoth replied to Ra: <q>Let the cries be called horrible
from this day forward.</q> Hor-Beḥudet fought long with
Set; he flung his iron at him, he smote him to the ground
in the city which henceforward was called Pa-Reḥeḥui
(the House of the Twins).<note place='foot'><q>The City of the Twins</q> seems to be the same as Ḥa-Zaui, <q>the
House of the Twins,</q> which Dümichen identifies with the Greek Khnubis,
close to Esna. An inscription at Esna says that it was also termed Pa-Saḥura,
<q>the House of Saḥura</q> (of the Fifth Dynasty), a name which
Dümichen finds in that of the modern village of Sahera, south of Esna.
On a prehistoric slate found at Abydos the name of the city appears to be
indicated by the figures of two twins inside the cartouche of a town
(de Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur les Origines de l'Égypte</hi>, i. pl. iii., first
register).</note> When Hor-Beḥudet returned,
he brought Set with him; his spear stuck in his
neck, his chain was on his hand; the mace of Horus had
smitten him, and closed his mouth. He brought him
before his father Ra.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then Ra said to Thoth: <q>Let the companions of Set
be given to Isis and Horus her son, that they may deal
with them as they will.</q>... So Horus the son of Isis
cut off the head of Set and his confederates before his
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
father Ra and all the great Ennead. He carried him
under his feet through the land, with the axe on his
head and in his back.</q>
</p>

<p>
Set, however, was not slain. He transformed himself
into a serpent, and the battles succeeded which ended
with the victory at Shas-ḥer in the land of Uaua. After
this <q>Harmakhis came in his bark and landed at Thes-Hor
(the Throne of Horus or Edfu). And Thoth said:
<q>The dispenser of rays who cometh forth from Ra has
conquered the enemy in his form (of a winged disc);
let him be named henceforward the dispenser of rays
who cometh forth from the horizon.</q> And Ra said to
Thoth: <q>Bring this sun (the winged disk) to every place
where I am, to the seats of the gods in Southern Egypt,
to the seats of the gods in Northern Egypt, (to the seats
of the gods) in the other world, that it may drive all evil
from its neighbourhood.</q> Thoth brought it accordingly
to all places, as many as exist where there are gods and
goddesses. It is the winged solar disc which is placed
over the sanctuaries of all gods and goddesses in Egypt,
since these sanctuaries are also that of Hor-Beḥudet.</q><note place='foot'>Naville, <hi rend='italic'>Mythe d'Horus</hi>, pls. 12-18; Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der
Götting. gelehrt. Akademie</hi>, xiv.</note>
</p>

<p>
The legend is a curious combination of the traditions
relative to the conquest of the neolithic population by
the Pharaonic Egyptians, of the myth of Osiris, of
etymological speculations about the meaning of certain
proper names, and of an attempt to explain the origin of
the winged solar disc. We may gather from it that the
disc was first used as an ornament at Edfu, and that it
was believed, like the winged bulls of Assyria, to have
the power of preventing the demons of evil from passing
the door over which it was placed. Whether, however,
this was one of the superstitions of the older people, or
whether it was brought by the conquerors from their
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
Babylonian home, is doubtful; perhaps the fact that the
disc was a symbolic and architectural ornament, and was
confined, so far as we know, to the temples of the official
gods, points in the latter direction. It is otherwise with
the temple relics mentioned in a legend which has been
preserved on a granite shrine of the Ptolemaic epoch,
that long served as a water-trough by the side of the
well at El-Arîsh. The temple from which it originally
came was that of At-Nebes, the sacred name of the city
of Qesem or Goshen, now Saft el-Henna. The legend
begins by describing the reign of Shu, who fortified At-Nebes
against <q>the children of Apophis,</q> the Semites of
<q>the red desert,</q> who came from the East <q>at nightfall
upon the road of At-Nebes</q> to invade Egypt. Here he
dwelt in his palace, and from hence he <q>ascended into
heaven,</q> when he had grown old and the time had come
for him to die. He was succeeded by his son Seb, who
<q>discussed the history of the city with the gods who
attended him, (and they told him) all that happened
when the Majesty of Ra was in At-Nebes, the conflicts
of the king Tum in this locality, the valour of the
Majesty of Shu in this city ... (and the wonders that)
the serpent-goddess Ankhet had done for Ra when he
was with her; the victories of the Majesty of Shu,
smiting the evil ones, when he placed her upon his brow.
Then said the Majesty of Seb: <q>I also (will place) her
upon my head, even as my father Shu did.</q> Seb entered
the temple of Aart (Lock of Hair) together with the gods
that were with him; then he stretched forth his hand to
take the casket in which (Ankhet) was; the serpent
came forth and breathed its vapour on the Majesty of
Seb, confounding him greatly; those who followed him
fell dead, and his Majesty himself was burned in that
day. When his Majesty had fled to the north of At-Nebes,
with the fire of the cobra upon him, behold, when
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
he came to the fields of henna, the pain of his burn was
not yet assuaged, and the gods who followed him said
unto him: <q>Come, let them take the lock (<foreign rend='italic'>aart</foreign>) of
Ra which is there, when thy Majesty shall go to see
it and its mystery, and his Majesty shall be healed (as
soon as it is placed) upon thee.</q> So the Majesty of Seb
caused the magic lock of hair to be brought to Pa-Aart
(the House of the Lock), for which was made that reliquary
of hard stone which is hidden in the secret place
of Pa-Aart, in the district of the divine lock of the god
Ra; and behold the fire departed from the limbs of the
Majesty of Seb. And many years afterwards, when this
lock of hair was brought back to Pa-Aart in At-Nebes,
and cast into the great lake of Pa-Aart, whose name is
the Dwelling of Waves, in order that it might be purified,
behold the lock became a crocodile; it flew to the water
and became Sebek, the divine crocodile of At-Nebes.</q><note place='foot'>Griffith, <q>Minor Explorations,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Memoir of the Egypt
Exploration Fund</hi> (1890), pp. 71-73; Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Dawn of Civilisation</hi>,
pp. 169-171.</note>
</p>

<p>
Inside the shrine is a picture of the two relics, the
cobra which adorned the head-dress of the Pharaoh, and
the <foreign rend='italic'>aart</foreign> or lock of hair which was supposed to give its
name to the temple. They were doubtless preserved at
At-Nebes, and shown to the faithful as the veritable
objects which had proved the bane and the antidote of
the god Seb. They introduce us to a side of Egyptian
religion which, though essentially characteristic of the
popular faith, had also received the sanction of the
official creed. The belief in amulets and charms was too
deeply engrained in the popular mind to be ignored;
they were consequently taken under the patronage of the
gods, and a theory was invented to explain their efficacy.
Already the later chapters of the Book of the Dead are
concerned with the various amulets which were necessary
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
to the preservation or resuscitation of the body; and even
if the latter were regarded as symbolic, they were concrete
symbols&mdash;symbols, that is to say, which actually
possessed the virtues ascribed to them. Just as the
name was a concrete entity, expressive of the very
essence of the thing to which it was applied, so too the
symbol was an entity with a concrete existence of its
own. The materialistic tendency of Egyptian thought,
added to the fetishism of the earlier stratum of native
religion, produced this result. The doctrine of the Ka
furnished a theory by which the educated classes could
explain the efficacy of the amulet and the active virtues
of the symbol. It was the Ka, the spiritual and yet
materialised double, of the amulet that worked the
charm&mdash;that made the scarab, for instance, a substitute
for the living heart, or the <foreign rend='italic'>dad</foreign>&mdash;the symbol of stability&mdash;a
passport to the other world.<note place='foot'>Cf. the 155th chapter of the Book of the Dead: <q>These words must
be spoken over a gilded <foreign rend='italic'>dad</foreign>, which is made from the heart of a sycamore
and hung round the neck of the dead. Then shall he pass through the
gates of the other world.</q> When this chapter was written, however,
the real origin of the <foreign rend='italic'>dad</foreign>&mdash;a row of four columns&mdash;had been forgotten,
and it was imagined to represent the backbone of Osiris. We are transported
by it into the full bloom of religious symbolism.</note>
</p>

<p>
The amulets buried with the dead, the relics preserved
in the temples, had originally been the fetishes of the
earlier population of Egypt. They hardly changed their
character when they became symbols endowed with
mysterious properties, or relics of the State gods which
still possessed miraculous powers. The peasant might be
told in the ritual of Amon: in <q>the sanctuary of the
god clamour is an abomination to him: pray for thyself
with a loving heart, in which the words remain hidden;
that he may supply thy need, hear thy words and accept
thine offering</q>;<note place='foot'>Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Life in Ancient Egypt</hi>, Eng. tr., p. 273.</note> but it was a teaching that was far
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
above him. When he entered the sanctuary it was to
see the processions of the priests and the relics preserved
in it, and it was in these relics that he still put his trust.
It was not only in Ethiopia that there were moving
and speaking statues which elected the king by taking
him by the hand; in Thebes itself, under the priestly
kings of the Twentieth Dynasty, we find wonder-working
statues whose reality was guaranteed by the priesthood.
One of them, it was said, was sent to Asia, where
it delivered a king's daughter from the demon that
possessed her, and afterwards returned in a moment to
Thebes of its own accord; while others answered the
questions addressed to them by nodding the head, or even
pronounced prophecies regarding the future.<note place='foot'>See Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, i.
pp. 82-89.</note> Indeed, as
we have seen, the old theory of the ka implied that the
statue of the dead man could be reanimated in a sense by
his spirit; and a text at Dendera speaks of the soul of
Hathor descending from heaven as a human-headed hawk
of lapis-lazuli, and uniting itself with her image. The
peasant, therefore, might be excused if he remained true
to the superstitions and traditions of his ancestors, and
left the official religion, with its one ineffable god, to
those who were cultured enough to understand it. Like
the peasant of modern Italy, he was content with a
divinity that he could see and handle, and about whose
wonder-working powers he had no doubt. Materialism
is the basis of primitive religion; the horizon of primitive
man is limited, and he has not yet learnt to separate
thought from the senses through which alone his narrow
world is known to him. The simple faith of a child
often wears a very materialistic form.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture X. The Place Of Egyptian Religion In The History
Of Theology.</head>

<p>
In the preceding lectures I have endeavoured to bring
before you the more salient points in the religion of the
ancient Egyptians, in so far as they illustrate their conception
of the divine. But we must remember that all
such descriptions of ancient belief must be approximate
only. We cannot put ourselves in the position of those
who held it; our inherited experiences, our racial tendencies,
our education and religious ideas, all alike forbid
it. If the Egyptians of the Theban period found it
difficult to understand the ritual of their own earlier
history, and misinterpreted the expressions and allusions
in it, how much more difficult must it be for us to do so.
The most ordinary religious terms do not bear for us the
same meaning that they bore for the Egyptians. The
name of God calls up other associations and ideas; the
very word <q>divine</q> has a different signification in the
ancient and the modern world among Eastern and Western
peoples. In fact, the more literal is our translation of
an old religious text, the more likely we are to misunderstand
it.
</p>

<p>
And yet in one sense we are the religious heirs of the
builders and founders of the Egyptian temples. Many
of the theories of Egyptian religion, modified and transformed
no doubt, have penetrated into the theology of
Christian Europe, and form, as it were, part of the woof in
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
the web of modern religious thought. Christian theology
was largely organised and nurtured in the schools of
Alexandria, and Alexandria was not only the meeting-place
of East and West, it was also the place where the
decrepit theology of Egypt was revivified by contact with
the speculative philosophy of Greece. The Egyptian,
the Greek, and the Jew met there on equal terms,
and the result was a theological system in which each
had his share. In Philo, we are told, we find Moses
Platonising; but the atmosphere in which he did so was
that of the old Egyptian faith. And what was true of
the philosophy of Philo was still more true of the philosophy
of Alexandrine Christianity.
</p>

<p>
You cannot but have been struck by the similarity of
the ancient Egyptian theory of the spiritual part of man
to that which underlies so much Christian speculation on
the subject, and which still pervades the popular theology
of to-day. There is the same distinction between soul and
spirit, the same belief in the resurrection of a material
body, and in a heaven which is but a glorified counterpart
of our own earth. Perhaps, however, the indebtedness of
Christian theological theory to ancient Egyptian dogma
is nowhere more striking than in the doctrine of the
Trinity. The very terms used of it by Christian theologians
meet us again in the inscriptions and papyri
of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Professor Maspero has attempted to show that the
Egyptian doctrine of the Trinity was posterior to that of
the Ennead.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</note> Whether this were so or not, it makes its
appearance at an early date in Egyptian theology, and
was already recognised in the Pyramid texts. Originally
the trinity was a triad like those we find in Babylonian
mythology. Here and there the primitive triads survived
into historical times, like that of Khnum and the two
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
goddesses of the Cataract. But more frequently the
trinity was an artificial creation, the formation of which
can still be traced. Thus at Thebes the female element
in it was found in Mut, <q>the mother</q> goddess, a title of
the supreme goddess of Upper Egypt; while Khonsu, the
moon-god, or Mentu, the old god of the nome, became the
divine son, and so took a place subordinate to that of
the local god Amon. Sometimes recourse was had to
grammar, and the second person in the trinity was
obtained by attaching the feminine suffix to the name of
the chief god. In this way Amon-t was grammatically
evolved from Amon, and even Ra-t from Ra. Elsewhere
an epithet of the god was transformed into his son; at
Memphis, for example, Imhotep, <q>he who comes in peace,</q>
a title of Ptaḥ, became his son and the second person in
the trinity. Other members of the trinity were fetched
from neighbouring cities and nomes; Nit of Sais had
Osiris as a husband, and Sekhet of Letopolis and Bast of
Bubastis were successively regarded as the wives of Ptaḥ.
</p>

<p>
The triad consisted of a divine father, wife, and son.
It was thus a counterpart of the human family, and
belonged to the same order of ideas as that which
explained the creation of the world by a process of
generation. This was the cosmology of Heliopolis, and
it is probable that to Heliopolis also we must ascribe the
doctrine of the Trinity. At any rate the doctrine seems
to have been solar in its origin. As Tum, the god of
sunset, was identical with Khepera, the sun of the morning,
and Ra, the sun of the noonday,&mdash;all three being
but one god under diverse forms,&mdash;so the divine father
was believed to engender himself in the person of the
divine son, and the divine mother to be one with the
divine father and son. The divine essence remained
necessarily the same, whatever might be the forms or
names under which it displayed itself; and the name, it
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
must be remembered, had for the Egyptian a separate
and real existence. The father became the son and the
son the father through all time, and of both alike the
mother was but another form. It was eternal fatherhood,
eternal motherhood, and eternal generation. The
development of the doctrine was assisted by that identification
of the Egyptian deities with the sun-god which
ended in solar pantheism, as well as by the old theory of
the ka, of a personality distinguishable from that to
which it belonged, identical with that of which it was the
double, and yet at the same time enjoying an independent
existence of its own.
</p>

<p>
With the spread of the Osirian form of faith the doctrine
of the Trinity became universal throughout Egypt. The
organisation of the faith had included the reduction of
the cycle of divinities connected with Osiris into a trinity.
Thoth and Anubis, Nebhât and Set, were separated from
him, and henceforth he was made the head of a triad,
in which Isis was the second person, and Horus, the
avenger of his father, was the third. How completely
the father and son were merged together may be seen from
a hymn to Horus which has been translated by Chabas<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Records of the Past</hi>, first series, ii.</note>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The gods are joyous at the arrival of Osiris,</q></l>
<l>the son of Horus, the intrepid,</l>
<l>the truth-speaking, the son of Isis, the heir of Osiris. The divine chiefs join him,</l>
<l>the gods recognise the omnipotent child himself ...</l>
<l>the reign of justice belongs to him.</l>
<l>Horus has found his justification, to him is given the title of his father;</l>
<l>he appears with the <foreign rend='italic'>atef</foreign>-crown by order of Seb. He takes the royalty of the two worlds,</l>
<l>the crown of Upper Egypt is placed upon his head.</l>
<l>He judges the world as he likes,</l>
<l>heaven and earth are beneath his eye,</l>
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
<l>he commands mankind&mdash;the intellectual beings, the race of the Egyptians and the northern barbarians.</l>
<l>The circuit of the solar disc is under his control;</l>
<l>the winds, the waters, the wood of the plants, and all vegetables....</l>
<l>Sanctifying, beneficent is his name ...</l>
<l>evil flies afar off, and the earth brings forth abundantly under her lord.</l>
<l>Justice is confirmed by its lord, who chases away iniquity.</l>
<l>Mild is thy heart, O (Osiris) Un-nefer, son of Isis;</l>
<l>he has taken the crown of Upper Egypt; for him is acknowleged the authority of his father in the great dwelling of Seb;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>he is Ra when speaking, Thoth when writing; the divine chiefs are at rest.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here Osiris is identified with Horus, and so becomes the
son of his own wife.
</p>

<p>
The Egyptian trinity has thus grown out of the triad
under the influence of the solar theology, and of the old
conception of a personality which possessed a concrete
form. Once introduced into the Osirian creed, it spread
with it throughout Egypt, and became a distinguishing
feature of Egyptian theology. Along with the doctrines
of the resurrection of the body and of a judgment to come,
it passed into the schools of Alexandria, and was there
thrown into the crucible of Greek philosophy. The
Platonic doctrine of ideas was adapted to the Egyptian
doctrine of personality, and the three persons of the
trinity became Unity, Mind, and Soul&mdash;absolute thought,
absolute reason, and absolute energy.<note place='foot'>See Cudworth's translation of Iamblichus.</note>
</p>

<p>
But while, on the one hand, there is continuity between
the religious thought of ancient Egypt and the religious
thought of the world of to-day, there is also continuity,
on the other hand, between the religion of Egypt and that
of primitive Babylonia. In the course of these lectures
I have more than once pointed to the fact: the Pharaonic
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
Egyptians were of Asiatic origin and they necessarily
brought with them the religious ideas of their Eastern
home. As we come to know more both of early Babylonian
civilisation and of the beginnings of Egyptian
history, we shall doubtless discover that the links between
them are closer than we at present imagine, and much
that is now obscure will become clear and distinct.
Meanwhile there is one link which I cannot pass over.
Astro-theology once played a considerable part in the
religion of the Egyptians. In the historical age it has
lost its importance; the stars have been identified with
the official deities, who have accordingly absorbed their
individual attributes; but echoes of the worship formerly
paid to them are still heard in the Pyramid texts. Saḥu
or Orion is still remembered as a mighty hunter, whose
hunting-ground was the plain of heaven, and whose prey
were the gods themselves. When he rises, it is said in
the Pyramid of Unas, <q>the stars fight together, and
the archers patrol</q> the sky which drops with rain; the
smaller stars which form his constellation pursue and
lasso the gods as the human hunter lassoes the wild bull;
they slay and disembowel their booty, and boil the flesh
in glowing caldrons. The <q>greater gods</q> are hunted
<q>in the morning,</q> those of less account at mid-day, the
<q>lesser gods</q> <q>at evening, and Saḥu refreshes himself
with the divine banquet,</q> feeding on their bodies and
absorbing <q>their magic virtues.</q> <q>The great ones
of the sky</q> launch <q>the flames against the caldrons
wherein are the haunches of the followers</q> of the gods;
the pole-star, <q>who causes the dwellers in the sky to
march in procession round</q> Orion, <q>throws into the
caldron the legs of their wives.</q><note place='foot'>Maspero, <q>La Pyramide du Roi Ounas,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>,
iv. pp. 59-61.</note> We are transported
to the cannibal's kitchen of some African chieftain, such
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
as that represented on a curious stela found in Darfûr,
and now in the museum of Constantinople. The whole
description takes us back to a period in the history of
Egypt long anterior to that of the Pyramids, when the
Pharaonic invaders were first beginning to mingle with
the older population of the land and become acquainted
with its practices. In the days of Unas the real
meaning of the expressions handed down by theological
conservatism had been forgotten, or was interpreted
metaphorically; but they remained to prove that the age
when Orion was still an object of worship superior to
the gods of heaven was one which went back to the very
dawn of Pharaonic history. The cult of the stars must
have been brought by <q>the followers of Horus</q> from
their Asiatic home.<note place='foot'>Elsewhere in the Pyramid texts the Akhimu-seku or planets of the
northern hemisphere are identified with the gods (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 218-220); Unas
himself rises as a star (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 391); Sirius is the sister of Pepi (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 172);
while the Khû or luminous spirits are identified with the planets (<hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi>
289). We hear of the <q>fields of the stars</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 419), of the morning
star in the fields of Alu (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 80), and of Akhimt, the grammatically-formed
wife of Akhim <q>planet,</q> who is associated with <q>Babî, the lord
of night</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 645, 646). One of the constellations frequently mentioned
in the Pyramid texts is <q>the Bull of heaven,</q> which was also an
important constellation in early Babylonian astronomy, where the name
formed part of an astronomical system; in <hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 421 the <q>Bull of
heaven</q> is called the <foreign rend='italic'>An</foreign> or <q>column</q> of Heliopolis. We hear also of
<q>the fresh water of the stars</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 210). With the latter may be
compared the goddess Qebḥu, or <q>Fresh Water,</q> the daughter of Anubis,
the primitive god of the dead, who poured forth the liquid from four
vases (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 393). With the name of the goddess the symbol of the
Antæopolite nome of Upper Egypt is associated.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fame of Orion was eclipsed in later days by that
of Sopd or Sirius. But this had its reason in the physio-graphical
peculiarities of Egypt. The heliacal rising of
Sirius, the Dog Star, that is to say, its first appearance
along with the sun, corresponded with the rise of the Nile
in Upper Egypt, and accordingly became a mark of time,
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
and the starting-point of the solar year. Its importance
therefore was great, not only for the calendar, but also
for those agricultural operations upon which the very
existence of Egypt depended. We need not wonder,
accordingly, if with the settlement of the Pharaonic
Egyptians in the valley of the Nile the worship and
name of Orion fell more and more into the background,
while that of Sirius became pre-eminent. How far back
the pre-eminence of Sirius reaches may be gathered from
the fact that the twentieth nome of Northern Egypt&mdash;that
of Goshen&mdash;derived its name from a combination of
the mummified hawk of Horus and the cone which, as
Brugsch first showed,<note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi> xv. p. 233.</note> represents the shaft of zodiacal
light that accompanies the rising of Sirius before the
dawn of day. Sopd or Sirius is thus identified with the
dead Horus who presided over Nekhen in Upper Egypt,
and preceded Osiris as the god of the dead.<note place='foot'>Or rather, perhaps, was the Osiris of primeval Egypt.</note>
</p>

<p>
Of the other stars and constellations we do not know
much. The Great Bear was called <q>the haunch of beef,</q>
and was at times identified with Set, and made the abode
of the souls of the wicked. Not far off was the hippopotamus,
which Brugsch would identify with Draco;
while among other constellations were to be found the
Lion and the Horus-hawk, as well as a warrior armed
with a spear.
</p>

<p>
All over the world the more prominent stars and constellations
have received names. But it is only the more
prominent and brilliant among them of which this is
true. So far as we know, the only people who have ever
systematically mapped out the heavens, dividing the stars
into groups, and giving to each group a name of its own,
were the Babylonians; and it was from the Babylonians
that the constellations as known to Greeks and Romans,
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
to Hindus, or to Chinese, were ultimately derived. The
inference, therefore, is near at hand, that the primitive
Egyptians also were indebted for their map of the sky to
the same source. And the inference is supported by
more than one fact.
</p>

<p>
On the one side, the names of several of the constellations
were the same among both Babylonians and
Egyptians. Of this the Twins, Aquarius, or the Family,
are examples, while it can hardly be an accident that
Orion in both systems of astronomy is a giant and a
hunter. <q>The Bull of heaven</q> was a Babylonian star,
and Jupiter bore the Sumerian name of Gudi-bir, <q>the
Bull of light</q>; in the Pyramid texts also we have a
<q>Bull of heaven,</q> the planet Saturn according to Brugsch,
Jupiter according to Lepsius. Still more striking are
the thirty-six Egyptian decans, the stars who watched
for ten days each over the 360 days of the ancient
Egyptian year, and were divided into two classes or
hemispheres, those of the day and those of the night.<note place='foot'>Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Chronologie der Aegypter</hi>, pp. 78, 79. See Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Aegyptologie</hi>, ii. pp. 339-342.</note>
Not only did the early Chaldæan year similarly consist of
360 days; it too was presided over by thirty-six <q>councillor</q>
stars, half of which were above the earth, while
the other half were below it.<note place='foot'>Hommel, <hi rend='italic'>Ausland</hi>, 1892, p. 102; Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur alten
Geschichte</hi>, i. pp. 12-15. Diodorus (ii. 30) states that the <q>councillor
gods</q> were only thirty in number; but the list of planetary stations
discovered by Hommel in <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 46, shows that the text must be
corrected into thirty-six. Indeed, Diodorus himself adds that every ten
days there was a change of constellation, so that in a year of 360 days
there must have been thirty-six constellations in all.</note> Such a coincidence cannot
have been accidental; the Babylonian and Egyptian
decans must have had the same origin.
</p>

<p>
But there was yet a further parallelism between the
stellar theology of Egypt and that of Babylonia. In
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
both countries the worship of the stars passed into an
astro-theology. The official gods were identified with the
planets and fixed stars, and the stellar cult of the people
was thus absorbed into the State religion. But whereas
this astro-theology was characteristic of Babylonia, it
has done little more than leave its traces on the historical
religion of Egypt. Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars were
identified with Horus under different forms, and Mercury
with Set, while Venus became <q>the bark (<foreign rend='italic'>za</foreign>)<note place='foot'>The Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>za</foreign> is the Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>ẓi</foreign>, <q>ship,</q> from which it seems to
have been borrowed.</note> of the
phœnix</q> or soul <q>of Osiris.</q> Sirius was made the star
of Isis, Orion the star of Osiris. But, like the cult of
the stars itself, this astro-theology belongs to a far-off age
in Egyptian history. It is the last faint reflection of a
phase of religious thought which had passed away when
the monumental records first begin.
</p>

<p>
It is the same with a curious echo of ancient Babylonian
cosmology, to which Prof. Hommel has drawn our
attention. The old Babylonian Epic of the Creation
begins with the words&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>At that time the heaven above was not known by name,</q></l>
<l>the earth beneath was not named,</l>
<l>in the beginning the deep was their generator,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>the chaos of the sea was the mother of them all.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The lines are the introduction to a story of the Creation
of which they form an integral part. On the walls of
the Pyramid of Pepi <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> we read again almost the same
words. Pepi, it is said, <q>was born of his father Tum.
At that time the heaven was not, the earth was not,
men did not exist, the gods were not born, there was no
death.</q><note place='foot'>Maspero, <q>La Pyramide du Roi Pepi 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>er</hi></q> in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>,
viii. p. 103.</note> But here the words have been introduced
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
without connection with the context; they cohere neither
with what precedes nor with what follows them, and
are evidently nothing but an old formula torn from the
cosmogony to which they once belonged, and repeated
without a clear understanding of what they really meant.
The phrases are found again in the later religious literature
of Egypt, embedded in it like flies in amber or the
fossils in an old sea-beach.<note place='foot'>For instance, in the Rhind Papyrus: Wiedemann, <q>Ein altägyptischer
Weltschöpfungsmythus,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Urquell</hi>, new ser., ii. p. 64, <q>Heaven
was not, earth was not, the good and evil serpents did not exist.</q></note> To recover their original
meaning we must betake ourselves to the clay tablets
of Assyria and Babylonia, and the cosmological theories
of early Chaldæa. They presuppose that story of a creation
out of the chaos of the deep which was indigenous
in Babylonia alone.
</p>

<p>
This deep, which lay at the foundation of Babylonian
cosmology, was symbolised in the temples by a <q>sea</q>
across which the images of the gods were carried in
<q>ships</q> on their days of festival. In Babylonia such
<q>seas</q> had a reason for their existence. The Persian
Gulf, it was believed, was the cradle of Babylonian
culture; it was also the source of that cosmogony which
saw in the deep the <q>mother</q> of all things. That it
should have its mimic representatives in the temples of
the country was but natural; it was from the <q>deep</q>
that the gods had come, and the deep was still the home
of the culture-god Ea.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Egypt, on the other hand, the sea was out of place
nay more, it was altogether unnatural. If water were
needed, the sacred Nile flowed at the foot of the temple
or else there were canals which conducted the waters
of the river through the temple lands. There was no
primeval deep to be symbolised, no Persian Gulf out of
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
which the culture-god had risen with the gifts of civilisation.
If the gods desired to sail in their barks, it was
reasonable to suppose that they would do so on the Nile
or its tributary canals. And yet the supposition would
be wrong. The gods had indeed their sacred <q>ships</q>
as in Babylonia; but, as in Babylonia, it was on an
artificially-constructed lake that they floated, and not, as
a rule, on the river Nile. Could anything indicate more
clearly the origin of the religious beliefs and practices of
the Pharaonic Egyptians? Like the brick tombs of the
Old Empire, with their recessed panels and pilasters, it
points to Babylonia and the cosmological theories which
had their birth in the Babylonian plain.<note place='foot'>The serpent with the seven necks (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 630, <hi rend='italic'>Teta</hi> 305) is the Babylonian
<q>serpent with the seven heads,</q> and points to Babylonia, where
alone seven was a sacred number. Other coincidences between Egyptian
and Babylonian mythology that may be noted are <q>the tree of life</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>khet n ânkh</foreign>) which grew in Alu, and was given by the stars to the dead
that they might live for ever (<hi rend='italic'>Pepi</hi> 431); and the <q>great house,</q> the
Babylonian <foreign rend='italic'>ê-gal</foreign>, which is several times referred to in the Pyramid
texts.</note>
</p>

<p>
The religion of ancient Egypt is thus no isolated fact.
It links itself, on the one hand, with the beliefs and
religious conceptions of the present, and, on the other
hand, with those of a yet older past. But it is a linking
only; Egyptian religion is no more the religion of ancient
Babylonia than it is modern Christianity. In Egypt it
assumed a form peculiar to itself, adapting itself to the
superstitions and habits of the earlier inhabitants of
the land, and developing the ideas which lay latent
within it. It was characterised by the inexorable logic
with which each of these ideas was followed to its
minutest conclusions, and at the same time by the want
of any attempt to harmonise these conclusions one with
the other, however inconsistent they might be. It was
also characterised by a spirit of creativeness; the Egyptian
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
created new religious conceptions because he was
not afraid to follow his premisses to their end.
</p>

<p>
But he was intensely practical. Abstractions as such
had little attraction for him, and he translated them into
material form. The symbolism of his system of writing
favoured the process: even such an abstract idea as that
of <q>becoming</q> became for him a <q>transformation</q> or
<q>change of outward shape.</q> In spite, therefore, of the
spirituality and profundity of much of his theology, his
religion remained essentially materialistic. The gods
might indeed pass one into the other and be but the
manifold forms under which the ever-changing divine
essence manifested itself, but this was because it was one
with nature and the infinite variety which nature displays.
Even the supreme god of Khu-n-Aten incorporated himself
at it were in the visible orb of the sun.
</p>

<p>
The incarnation of the deity accordingly presented no
difficulty to the Egyptian mind. It followed necessarily
from the fundamental principles of his creed. The
divinity which permeated the whole of nature revealed
itself more clearly than elsewhere in that which possessed
life. Egyptian religious thought never quite shook itself
free from the influences of the primitive belief that life
and motion were the same. Whatever moves possesses
life, whatever lives must move;&mdash;such was, and still is,
one of the axioms of primitive man. And since the deity
manifested itself in movement, it could be recognised in
whatever was alive. Man on the one side became a god
in the person of the Pharaoh, the gods on the other side
became men who had lived and died like Osiris, or had
ruled over Egypt in the days of old. Even the ordinary
man contained within him a particle or effluence of the
divine essence which could never die; and the bodily
husk in which it was incarnated could, under certain
conditions, acquire the properties of that divinity to
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
which it had afforded a home. That the divine essence
could thus assume an individual form, was part of the
doctrine which saw, in the manifold varieties of nature,
the manifestations of a <q>single god.</q> The belief in the
incarnation of the deity was a necessary consequence of
a materialistic pantheism. And it mattered little whether
the incarnation took place under a human or under an
animal shape; the human and the animal god had alike
been a heritage from elements which, diverse though they
may have been in origin, combined to form the Egyptian
people, and both the man and the beast were alike living
and therefore divine. The beast was more mysterious
than the man, that was all; the workings of its mind
were more difficult to comprehend, and the language it
spoke was more unintelligible. But on that very account
it was better adapted for the symbolism which literature
and education encouraged, and which became an essential
part of the texture of Egyptian thought.
</p>

<p>
If, then, we would understand the conception of the
divine formed by the educated Egyptian of the historical
age, we must remember the characteristics of Egyptian
thought which lay behind it. Materialism and symbolism
constituted the background of Egyptian religion. The
one presupposed the other, for the symbol presented the
abstract idea in a material and visible shape, while the
materialism of the Egyptian mind demanded something
concrete which the senses could apprehend. The conception
of the ka, with which Egyptian religion begins, is
characteristic of Egyptian religious thought up to the
last. It is like the <q>materialised spirits</q> of modern
spiritualism, spirits which are merely matter in an etherialised
form. The Egyptian gave not only shape but
substance to his mental and spiritual creations; like the
<q>ideas</q> of Plato, they became sensuous realities like the
written symbols which expressed them. Not only were
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
the name and the thing never dissociated from one
another, the name was looked on as the essence of the
thing, and the name included its expression in both sound
and writing. The bird which represented the idea of
<q>soul</q> became in time the soul itself.
</p>

<p>
This very fact assisted in spiritualising Egyptian religion.
Ideas and their symbols interchange one with
the other; the ideas, moreover, develop and pass out of
one form into another. The identification, therefore, of
the abstract and the concrete, of ideas and substantial
existence, made a pantheistic conception of the universe
easy. The divinity clothed itself in as many forms as
there were symbols to express it, and these forms passed
one into the other like phases of thought. The Egyptian
was the first discoverer of the term <q>becoming,</q> and the
keynote of his creed was the doctrine of transformation.
</p>

<p>
Transformation, it must be remembered, is not transmigration.
There was no passage of an individual soul
from body to body, from form to form; the divine essence
permeated all bodies and forms alike, though it manifested
itself at a given moment only under certain ones. It
was in this power of manifestation that the transformation
consisted. Had the Egyptian not been fettered by his
materialistic symbolism, he would doubtless have gone
further and concluded that the various manifestations of
the divinity were subjective only&mdash;existing, that is to
say, only in the mind of the observer; as it was, he held
them to be objective, and to possess the same substantial
reality as the symbolic pictures by which they were
denoted.
</p>

<p>
With all this, however, there was no severe literalism
in the interpretation of the symbol. Whatever may have
been the case at the outset, the symbol was as much a
metaphor in the historical ages of Egyptian history as are
the metaphors of our own language. When the Egyptian
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
spoke of <q>eating</q> his god, he meant no more than we do
when we speak of <q>absorbing</q> a subject.<note place='foot'>Thus in the Pyramid texts (<hi rend='italic'>Unas</hi> 518) Unas is described as <q>eating</q>
the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt.</note> The Pyramid
texts are full of such faded and forgotten metaphors; the
Egyptian was conservative above all other men, and the
language of religion is conservative above all others.
Doubtless, in some cases, he was the victim of the symbols
and metaphors he used; but in this respect he does not
stand alone. Where he has no rival is in the magnitude
of the part played in his religion by the symbol and its
logical development.
</p>

<p>
It was just this symbolism which enabled him to retain,
on the one hand, all the old formulæ with their gross
materialism and childlike views of the universe, and, on
the other hand, to attain to a conception of the divine
being which was at once spiritual and sublime. For
Egyptian religion, as we find it in the monuments of the
educated classes before the decay of the monarchy, was,
in spite of its outward show of symbols and amulets, full
of high thoughts and deep emotions. I cannot do better
than quote the words in which it is described by one of its
least prejudiced students, Professor Maspero:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie égyptiennes</hi>, ii. pp. 446, 447.</note> <q rend='pre'>When we
put aside the popular superstitions and endeavour solely
to ascertain its fundamental doctrines, we soon recognise
that few religions have been so exalted in their principles.
The Egyptians adored a being who was unique, perfect,
endowed with absolute knowledge and intelligence, and
incomprehensible to such an extent that it passes man's
powers to state in what he is incomprehensible. He is
<q>the one of one, he who exists essentially, the only one
who lives substantially, the sole generator in heaven and
earth, who is not himself generated.</q> Always the same,
always immutable in his immutable perfection, always
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
present in the past as in the future, he fills the universe
without any form in the world being able to give even a
feeble idea of his immensity; he is felt everywhere, he
is perceived nowhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Unique in essence, he is not unique in person. He
is father because he exists, and the force of his nature
is such that he is eternally begetting, without ever growing
weak or exhausted. He has no need to go outside
himself for this act of generation; he finds in his own
bosom the material of his perpetual fatherhood. Alone
in the plenitude of his being he conceives his offspring;
and as in him there can be no distinction between conception
and birth, from all eternity <q>he produces in
himself another self.</q> He is at once the divine father,
mother, and son. Conceived of God, born of God,
without separating from God, these three persons are
God in God, and, far from dividing the primitive unity
of the divine nature, they all three combine to constitute
his infinite perfection.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Doubtless the mind of the uneducated classes could
neither understand nor rise to such lofty heights. Human
intelligence supports with difficulty so pure an idea of
an absolute being. All the attributes of divinity&mdash;his
immensity, his eternity, his independence&mdash;place him at
an infinite distance from ourselves; to comprehend and
participate in them, we must make him think as we
think, we must lend him our passions and subject him
to our laws. God must take upon him, with human
nature, all the weaknesses that accompany it, all the
infirmities under which it labours; in a word, the Word
must become flesh. The immaterial god must incarnate
himself, must come to the land of Egypt and people it
with the gods, his children. Each of the persons of
the primitive trinity thus became independent and
formed a new type, from which, in their turn, other
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
lower types emanated. From trinity to trinity, from
personification to personification, that truly incredible
number of divinities was soon reached, with forms
sometimes grotesque and often monstrous, who descended
by almost insensible degrees from the highest
to the lowest ranks of nature. The scribes, the priests,
the officials, all the educated world, in fact, of Egyptian
society, never professed that gross paganism which caused
Egypt to be called with justice <q>the mother of superstitions.</q>
The various names and innumerable forms
attributed by the multitude to as many distinct and independent
divinities, were for them merely names and
forms of one and the same being. <q>God, when he
comes as a generator, and brings to light the latent
forces of the hidden causes, is called Ammon; when he
is the spirit who embodies all that is intelligent, he is
Imhotep; when he is he who accomplishes all things
with art and verity, he is Phthah; when he is God good
and beneficent, he is Osiris.</q> What the scribe means by
these words is the mysterious infinite which animates
the universe, the eternal, impenetrable to eyes of flesh,
but perceived vaguely by the eyes of the spirit. Behind
the sensuous appearance, behind the manifestation of the
divine nature wherein the popular imagination fancied
it saw that nature itself, he beheld confusedly a being
obscure and sublime, a full comprehension of whom is
denied him, and the feeling of this incomprehensible
presence lends to his prayer a deep and thrilling accent,
a sincerity of thought and emotion, a thousand times
more touching than that medley of amorous puerilities, of
mystic languors and morbid contrition, which is so often
the substitute for religious poetry.</q>
</p>

<p>
There were two deep-rooted conceptions in the
Egyptian mind which had much to do with the purity
and sublimity of his religious ideas. One of these was
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
the conception of a divine law which governed the
universe, and to which the gods themselves had to submit.
The other was that of a moral God, of a <q>good
being</q> who rewarded&mdash;not piety but&mdash;uprightness, and
punished iniquity. The world was ordered and controlled,
not by chance or caprice, but by a fixed law,
which was, characteristically enough, impersonated in the
goddess Mât. And this law, unlike the blind destiny of
the Greek or Roman, was at once divine and moral; it
not only represented the order of the universe, against
which there was no appeal, but it also represented an
order which was in accordance with justice and truth.
The law which all must obey under penalty of being
cast into outer darkness, was an intelligent and moral
law; it commended itself necessarily and instinctively
to all intelligent beings whose thoughts, words, and deeds
were alike righteous. Only those who had conformed
to it could be admitted after death into the paradise of
Osiris or into the company of the gods, and the seal of
justification was the pronouncement that the dead man
had <q>spoken the truth,</q> and that his confession in the
judgment-hall of Osiris had been in agreement with the
truth and with the eternal order of the universe.
</p>

<p>
Of the moral character of the Osirian creed I have
already spoken. It is the first official recognition by
religion that what God requires is uprightness of conduct
and not ceremonial orthodoxy, the first identification of
religion with morality. And the god who required this
uprightness of conduct was not a <q>lord of hosts,</q> who
compelled adoration by the display of his power, but
Un-nefer, <q>the good being,</q> who existed in order to do
good to men. In the conflict with evil he had apparently
been worsted; but though he had died a
shameful death, his disciples believed that it had been
endured on their behalf, and that for those who followed
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
in his footsteps, and whose lives resembled his, he had
provided a better and a happier Egypt in another world,
into which sin and pain and death could not enter, and
where he ruled eternally over the cities and fields of the
blest.
</p>

<p>
In the Osirian creed, writer after writer has discovered
<q>fore-gleams</q> of Christianity more striking even
than the doctrine of the Trinity, which belongs to the
philosophy of faith. But there is nothing wonderful in
the continuity of religious thought. One of the chief
lessons impressed upon us by the science of the century
which has just passed away, is that of continuity;
throughout the world of nature there is no break, no
isolated link in the long chain of antecedent and consequent,
and still less is there any in the world of
thought. Development is but another name for the
continuity which binds the past to the present with
stronger fetters than those of destiny. It is not only
the philosophy of Christianity, or the wider and more
general doctrines of its creed, which find an echo in the
religion of ancient Egypt; in details also Egypt is
linked with the modern world. Long before the Hebrew
prophets pictured the kingdom of the Messiah, an
Egyptian poet, in the reign of Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, had said:
<q>A king shall come from the south, Ameni, the truth-declaring,
by name. He shall be the son of a woman
of Nubia, and will be born in [the south].... He
shall assume the crown of Upper Egypt, and lift up the
red crown of the north. He shall unite the double
crown.... The people of the age of the son of man
shall rejoice and establish his name for all eternity.
They shall be removed far from evil, and the wicked
shall humble their mouths for fear of him. The Asiatics
shall fall before his blows, and the Libyans before his
flame. The wicked shall wait on his judgments, the
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
rebels on his power. The royal serpent on his brow
shall pacify the revolted. A wall shall be built, even
that of the prince, that the Asiatics may no more enter
into Egypt.</q><note place='foot'>Golénischeff, in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xv. pp. 88, 89. The passage is
found in Papyrus 1116 of the Hermitage at St. Petersburg. The words
<q>son of man</q> are a literal translation of the original <foreign rend='italic'>si-n-sa</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet more striking is the belief in the virgin-birth of
the god Pharaoh, which goes back at least to the time of
the Eighteenth Dynasty. On the western wall of one
of the chambers in the southern portion of the temple
of Luxor, Champollion first noticed that the birth of
Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> is portrayed. The inscriptions and
scenes which describe it have since been copied, and we
learn from them that he had no human father; Amon
himself descended from heaven and became the father
of the future king. His mother was still a virgin when
the god of Thebes <q>incarnated himself,</q> so that she
might <q>behold him in his divine form.</q> And then the
hieroglyphic record continues with words that are put
into the mouth of the god. <q>Amon-hotep,</q> he is made
to say, <q>is the name of the son who is in thy womb.
He shall grow up according to the words that proceed
out of thy mouth. He shall exercise sovereignty and
righteousness in this land unto its very end. My soul
is in him, (and) he shall wear the twofold crown of
royalty, ruling the two worlds like the sun for ever.</q><note place='foot'><p>For the scenes accompanying the text, see Gayet, <q>Le Temple de
Louxor,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Mission archéologique française au Caire</hi>,
xv. 1, pl. lxxi., where, however, the copy of the inscriptions is very
incorrect. My translation is made from a copy of my own. The whole
inscription is as follows: <q rend='pre'>Said by Amon-Ra, etc.: He (the god) has
incarnated himself in the royal person of this husband, Thothmes <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, etc.;
he found her lying in her beauty; he stood beside her as a god. She has
fed upon sweet odours emanating from his majesty. He has gone to her
that he may be a father through her. He caused her to behold him in
his divine form when he had gone upon her that she might bear a child
at the sight of his beauty. His lovableness penetrated her flesh, filling
it with the odour of all his perfumes of Punt.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Said by Mut-em-ua before the majesty of this august god Amon, etc.,
the twofold divinity: How great is thy twofold will, how [glorious thy]
designs in making thy heart repose upon me! Thy dew is upon all my
flesh in ... This royal god has done all that is pleasing to him with her.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Said by Amon before her majesty: Amon-hotep is the name of the son
which is in thy womb. This child shall grow up according to the words
which proceed out of thy mouth. He shall exercise sovereignty and
righteousness in this land unto its very end. My soul is in him: he shall
wear the twofold crown of royalty, ruling the two lands like the sun
for ever.</q></p></note>
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
But Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> was not the first of whom it had
been said that his father was a god. Fragments of a
similar text have been found by Dr. Naville at Dêr el-Bâharî,
from which we may gather that queen Hatshepsu
also claimed to have been born of Amon. How much
further back in Egyptian history the belief may go we
do not know: the kings of the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties
called themselves sons of the sun-god, and the Theban
monarchs whose virgin-mothers were wedded to Amon,
incarnate in the flesh, did but work out the old conception
in a more detailed and definite way.
</p>

<p>
It was given to the Egyptians to be one among the
few inventive races of mankind. They were pioneers
of civilisation; above all, they were the inventors of
religious ideas. The ideas, it is true, were not self-evolved;
they presupposed beliefs which had been bequeathed
by the past; but their logical development and
the forms which they assumed were the work of the
Egyptian people. We owe to them the chief moulds
into which religious thought has since been thrown.
The doctrines of emanation, of a trinity wherein one god
manifests himself in three persons, of absolute thought
as the underlying and permanent substance of all things,
all go back to the priestly philosophers of Egypt.
Gnosticism and Alexandrianism, the speculations of
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
Christian metaphysic and the philosophy of Hegel, have
their roots in the valley of the Nile. The Egyptian
thinkers themselves, indeed, never enjoyed the full
fruition of the ideas they had created; their eyes were
blinded by the symbolism which had guided their first
efforts, their sight was dulled by overmuch reverence
for the past, and the materialism which came of a
contentment with this life. They ended in the scepticism
of despair or the prosaic superstitions of a decadent
age. But the task which dropped from their hands was
taken up by others; the seeds which they had sown
were not allowed to wither, and, like the elements of
our culture and civilisation, the elements also of our
modes of religious thought may be traced back to the
<q>dwellers on the Nile.</q> We are heirs of the civilised
past, and a goodly portion of that civilised past was the
creation of ancient Egypt.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. The Religion Of The Babylonians.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture I. Introductory.</head>

<p>
It is now fourteen years ago since I delivered a course
of lectures for the Hibbert Trustees on the religion of
the ancient Babylonians. The subject at that time was
almost untouched; even such materials as were then
accessible had been hardly noticed, and no attempt
had been made to analyse or reduce them to order,
much less to draw up a systematic account of ancient
Babylonian religion. It was necessary to lay the very
foundations of the study before it could be undertaken,
to fix the characteristic features of the Babylonian faith
and the lines along which it had developed, and, above
all, to distinguish the different elements of which it
was composed. The published texts did not suffice for
such a work; they needed to be supplemented from that
great mass of unpublished cuneiform documents with
which the rooms of our museums are filled. My lectures
were necessarily provisional and preliminary only, and I
had to content myself with erecting a scaffold on which
others might build. The time had not yet come for
writing a systematic description of Babylonian religion,
and of the phases through which it passed during the
long centuries of its existence.
</p>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<p>
Nor has the time come yet. The best proof of this
is the unsatisfactory nature of the attempts that have
recently been made to accomplish the task. Our evidence
is still too scanty and imperfect, the gaps in it
are too numerous, to make anything of the sort possible.
Our knowledge of the religious beliefs of Babylonia and
Assyria is at best only piecemeal. Now and again we
have inscriptions which illustrate the belief of a particular
epoch or of a particular class, or which throw light
on a particular side of the official or popular religions;
but such rays of light are intermittent, and they penetrate
the darkness only to be succeeded by a deeper
obscurity than before. All we can hope to do is to
discover the leading conceptions which underlay the
religion of Babylonia in its various forms, to determine
and distinguish the chief elements that went to create
it, and to picture those aspects of it on which our
documentary materials cast the most light. But anything
like a systematic description of Babylonian religion
will for many years to come be altogether out of the
question; it must wait until the buried libraries of
Chaldæa have been excavated, and all their contents
studied. We are but at the beginning of discoveries,
and the belief that our present conclusions are final is
the belief of ignorance.
</p>

<p>
As I pointed out in my Hibbert Lectures, the first
endeavour of the student of ancient Babylonian religion
must be to distinguish between the Semitic and non-Semitic
elements embodied in it. And before we can
do this we must also distinguish between the Semitic
and non-Semitic elements in our sources of information.
This was the principal task to which I applied myself,
and the failure to recognise the necessity of it has been
the main cause of the little progress that has been made
in the study of the subject. Since I wrote the means
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
for undertaking the task with success have been multiplied;
thanks to the excavations of the French and
American explorers, the pre-Semitic world of Babylonia
has been opened out to us in a way of which we could
not have dreamed; and numberless texts have been
found which belong to the early days of Sumerian or
non-Semitic culture. We are no longer confined to the
editions of Sumerian texts made in later times by
Semitic scribes; we now have before us the actual
inscriptions which were engraved when Sumerian princes
still ruled the land, and the Sumerian language was still
spoken by their subjects. We can read in them the
names of the gods they worshipped, and the prayers
which they offered to the spirits of heaven. The
materials are at last at hand for determining in some
measure what is Sumerian and what is Semitic, and
what again may be regarded as a mixture or amalgamation
of both.
</p>

<p>
But though the materials are at hand, it will be long
before they can all be examined, much less thoroughly
criticised. I cannot emphasise too strongly the provisional
and imperfect character of our present knowledge
of Babylonian literature. Thousands of tablets are lying
in the museums of Europe and America, which it will
take years of hard work on the part of many students
to copy and read. At Tello,<note place='foot'>Also written Telloḥ, on the assumption that the second syllable
represents <foreign rend='italic'>loḥ</foreign>, <q>a tablet.</q> But the native pronunciation is Tello.</note> M. de Sarzec found a
library of more than 30,000 tablets, which go back to
the days of the priest-king Gudea; and the great temple
of Bel at Nippur in Northern Babylonia has yielded five
times as many more to the American excavators. Other
excavations by natives or Turkish officials have at the
same time brought to light multitudinous tablets from
other ancient sites,&mdash;from Jokha, near the Shatt el-Hai,
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
and from the ruins of the temple of Nebo at Borsippa.
It is true that a large proportion of these tablets are
contracts and similar business documents, but they contain
much that is of importance not only for the social
history of Babylonia, but for its religious history as well.
Meanwhile the vast number of texts which have come
from the mounds of Nineveh and Sippara is still but
imperfectly known; it is only within the last three years
that the catalogue of the Kouyunjik collection of tablets,
which have been in the British Museum for almost half
a century, has been at last completed in five portly
volumes; and there still remain the numberless tablets
from Babylonia which line the Museum shelves. And
even of what has been catalogued there is much which
has not yet been fully copied or examined. The British
Museum, moreover, is no longer the sole repository of
Babylonian literature. The Louvre, the Berlin Museum,
and the American University of Pennsylvania, are equally
filled with the clay tablets of the Babylonian scribes;
while the collection in the Museum of Constantinople
far exceeds those which have been formed elsewhere.
Even private individuals have their collections of larger
or less extent; that of Lord Amherst of Hackney, for
example, would have made the fortune of one of the
great museums of the world but a few years ago.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that it will be long before more than
a fraction of this vast and ever-accumulating literature
can be adequately studied. And what adds to the
difficulty is that it is still increasing year by year. At
present there are as many as three exploring expeditions
in Babylonia. M. de Sarzec's successor on behalf of
the French Government is still carrying on work at
Tello, the ancient Lagas, which was begun as far back
as 1877; the Americans are continuing their excavations
at Nippur, where, ever since 1888, they have been
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
excavating for the first time on a thoroughly systematic
and scientific plan; and now the Germans have commenced
work at Babylon itself, and have already fixed
the site of the temple of Bel-Merodach and of that
palace of Nebuchadrezzar in which Alexander the Great
died.<note place='foot'>The palace is represented by the mound called El-Qasr, the temple by
that called Tell 'Amrân ibn 'Ali.</note> Even while I am writing, the news has come
of the discovery of a great library at Nippur, which
seems to have been buried under the ruins of the
building in which it was kept as far back as the
Abrahamic age. The mounds in which it has been
found lie to the south-west of the great temple of Bel.
Already nearly 20,000 tablets have been rescued from
it, and it is calculated that at least 130,000 are yet
to be disinterred. The tablets lie in order upon the
clay shelves on which they were arranged in the days
of Khammurabi, the Amraphel of Genesis;<note place='foot'>The name of Khammu-rabi or Ammu-rabi is written Ammu-rapi in
Harper, <hi rend='italic'>Letters</hi>, iii. p. 257, No. 255 (K 552), as was first noticed by Dr.
Pinches (see the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, May 1901,
p. 191); Dr. Lindl suggests that the final -<foreign rend='italic'>l</foreign> of the Hebrew form is derived
from the title <foreign rend='italic'>ilu</foreign>, <q>god,</q> so often given to the king. Professor Hommel
further points out that the character <foreign rend='italic'>be</foreign> with which the final syllable of the
royal name is sometimes written also had the value of <foreign rend='italic'>pil</foreign>.</note> and, so far
as they have been examined by Professor Hilprecht, it
would appear that they relate to all the various branches
of knowledge which were known and studied at the
time. History, chronology, religion and literature,
philology and law, are all alike represented in them.
When we remember that the catastrophe which overwhelmed
them occurred more than two thousand years
before the Christian era, we may well ask what new and
unexpected information the future has in store for us,
and hesitate about coming to conclusions which the
discovery of to-morrow may overthrow. We know but
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
a tithe of what the monuments of Babylonia have yet
to reveal to us, and much that we seem to know to-day
will be profoundly modified by the knowledge we shall
hereafter possess.
</p>

<p>
The imperfection of his materials places the student
of Babylonian religion at a greater disadvantage than
the student of Babylonian history or social life. The
facts once obtained in the field of history or of social
life remain permanently secured; the theories based
upon them may have to be changed, but the facts
themselves have been acquired by science once for all.
But a religious fact is to a large extent a matter of
interpretation, and the interpretation depends upon the
amount of the evidence at our disposal as well as upon
the character of the evidence itself. Moreover, the
history of religion is a history of spiritual and intellectual
development; it deals with ideas and dogmas
which shift and change with the process of the ages, and
take as it were the colour of each succeeding century.
The history of religion transports us out of what German
metaphysicians would call the <q>objective</q> world into
the <q>subjective</q> world of thought and belief; it is not
sufficient to know the literal meaning of its technical
terms, or the mere order and arrangement of its rites
and ceremonies; we have to discover what were the
religious conceptions that were connected with the
terms, and the dogmas that underlay the performance
of a particular rite. A mere barren list of divine names
and titles, or even the assurance that theology had
identified certain gods with one another, will not carry
us very far; at most they are but the dry bones of
a theological system, which must be made to live before
they can tell us what that system actually was.
</p>

<p>
The study of ancient Babylonian religion is thus
beset with many difficulties. Our materials are imperfect,
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
and yet at the same time are perpetually growing;
the religious system to which they relate is a
combination of two widely different forms of faith,
characteristic of two entirely different races; and before
we can understand it properly, we must separate the
elements of which it consists, and assign to each their
chronological position. The very fact, however, that
religious texts are usually of immemorial antiquity, and
that changes inevitably pass over them as they are
handed down in successive editions, makes such a task
peculiarly difficult. Nevertheless it is a task which must
be undertaken before we have the right to draw a conclusion
from the texts with which we deal. We must
first know whether they are originally Sumerian or
Semitic, or whether they belong to the age when
Sumerian and Semitic were fused in one; whether, again,
they are composite or the products of a single author
and epoch; whether, lastly, they have been glossed and
interpolated, and their primitive meaning transformed.
We must have a chronology for our documents as well as
an ethnology, and beware of transforming Sumerian into
Semitic, or Semitic into Sumerian, or of interpreting the
creations of one age as if they were the creations of
another. The critical examination of the texts must
precede every attempt to write an account of Babylonian
religion, if the account is to be of permanent value.
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately we have nothing in Babylonia that
corresponds with the Pyramid texts of Egypt. We
have no body of doctrine which, in its existing form, is
coeval with the early days of the monarchy, and can
accordingly be compared with the religious belief and
the religious books of a later time. The Pyramid texts
have enabled us to penetrate behind the classical age of
Egyptian religion, and so trace the development of many
of the dogmas which distinguished the faith of later
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
epochs; it is possible that similarly early records of the
official creed may yet be discovered in Babylonia; but
up to the present nothing of the sort has been found.
We are confined there to the texts which have passed
through the hands of countless editors and scribes, or
else to such references to religious beliefs and worship
as can be extracted from the inscriptions of kings and
priests. The sacred books of Babylonia are known to
us only in the form which they finally assumed. The
Babylonian religion with which we are acquainted is
that official theology in which the older Sumerian and
Semitic elements were combined together and worked
into an elaborate system. To distinguish the elements
one from the other, and discover the beliefs and conceptions
which underlie them, is a task of infinite labour and
complexity. But it is a task which cannot be shirked if
we would even begin to understand the nature of Babylonian
religion, and the fundamental ideas upon which it
rested. We must analyse and reconstruct, must compare
and classify and piece together as best we may, the fragments
of belief and practice that have come down to us.
Above all, we must beware of confusing the old with the
new, of confounding Sumerian with Semitic, or of ascribing
to an earlier epoch the conceptions of a later time.
</p>

<p>
The picture will be at most but a blurred and mutilated
one. But its main outlines can be fixed, and with
the progress of discovery and research they will be
more and more filled in. And the importance of the
picture lies in the fact that Babylonian religion exercised
a profound influence not only over the lands
immediately adjoining the Babylonian plain, but over
the whole of Western Asia as well. Long before the
days of Abraham, Canaan was a Babylonian province,
obeying Babylonian law, reading Babylonian books, and
writing in Babylonian characters. Along with Babylonian
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
culture necessarily came also the religion of
Babylonia and the theological or cosmogonic dogmas
which accompanied it. Abraham himself was born in
a Babylonian city, and the religion of his descendants
was nurtured in an atmosphere of Babylonian thought.
The Mosaic Law shows almost as clear evidences of Babylonian
influence as do the earlier chapters of Genesis.
</p>

<p>
Recent discoveries have gone far towards lifting the
veil that has hitherto covered the beginnings of Babylonian
history. We have been carried back to a time
when the Edin or <q>plain</q> of Babylonia was still in
great measure a marsh, and the waters of the Persian
Gulf extended 120 miles farther inland than they do
to-day. If we take the rate at which the land has grown
since the days of Alexander the Great as a basis of
measurement, this would have been from eight to nine
thousand years ago. At this time there were already
two great sanctuaries in the country, around each of
which a settlement or city had sprung up. One of these
was Nippur in the north, the modern Niffer; the other
was Eridu, <q>the good city,</q><note place='foot'>Eridû is a Semitised abbreviation of the Sumerian Eri-dugga, <q>good
city.</q></note> now marked by the mounds
of Nowâwis or Abu-Shahrain, which stood on what was
then the shore of the Persian Gulf. Now its site is
more than a hundred miles distant from the sea. But
it was once the seaport of Babylonia, whose inhabitants
caught fish in the waters of the Gulf or traded with the
populations of the Arabian coast. Nippur, on the other
hand, was inland and agricultural. It was the primitive
centre of those engineering works which gradually converted
the pestiferous marshes of Babylonia into a
fruitful plain, watered by canals and rivers, and protected
from inundation by lofty dykes. While Eridu
looked seaward, Nippur looked landward, and the
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
influences that emanated from each were accordingly
diverse from the very outset.
</p>

<p>
As I pointed out in my Hibbert Lectures, Babylon
must have been a colony of Eridu. Its tutelary god
was a son of Ea of Eridu, and had been worshipped at
Eridu long before his cult was carried northward to
Babylon. Dr. Peters has since suggested that Ur was
similarly a colony of Nippur. The moon-god of Ur was
the son of the god of Nippur, and though Ur lay but a
few miles from Eridu, it was an inland and not a maritime
town. It stood on the desert plateau to the west
of the Euphrates, overlooking the Babylonian plain,
which at the time of its foundation had doubtless not
as yet been reclaimed. But its situation exposed it to
Arabian influences. Unlike the other great cities of
Babylonia, it was in Arabia rather than in Babylonia,
and its population from the outset must have contained
a considerable Arabian element. Semitic settlers from
Southern Arabia and Canaan occupied it, and it was
known to them as Uru, <q>the city</q> <foreign rend='italic'>par excellence</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Years ago I pointed out that <foreign rend='italic'>uru</foreign> was one of the words which (along
with what it signified) was borrowed by the Semites from their Sumerian
neighbours or predecessors (<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>,
i. 2, pp. 304, 305).</note>
</p>

<p>
Nippur and Eridu were already old when Ur first
rose to fame. They were both great sanctuaries rather
than the capitals of secular kingdoms. The god of
Nippur was El-lil, <q>the lord of the ghost-world,</q><note place='foot'>Literally, <q>the lord of the ghost(s),</q> <q>the ghost-lord.</q> The name
has been so misunderstood and misinterpreted, that it is necessary to
enter into some details in regard to it, though the facts ought to be
known even to the beginner in Assyriology. The Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>lilla</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>
meant a <q>ghost,</q> <q>spirit,</q> or <q>spook,</q> and was borrowed by the
Semites under the form of <foreign rend='italic'>lilû</foreign>, from which the feminine <foreign rend='italic'>lilîtu</foreign> was formed
in order to represent the female <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> whom the Sumerians called <foreign rend='italic'>kiel
lilla</foreign>, <q>handmaid of (the male) <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>.</q> <foreign rend='italic'>Lilîtu</foreign> is the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Lîlîth</foreign>
(Isa. xxxiv. 14). In the lexical tablets the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> is explained as <q>a breath
of wind</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>saru</foreign>), or more exactly as a <foreign rend='italic'>zaqiqu</foreign>, or <q>dust-cloud</q> (not, of
course, <q>a fog,</q> as it has sometimes been translated, in defiance alike of
common sense and of modern Arab beliefs). When the spirit of Ea-bani
rose from the ground, it naturally took the form of a <q>dust-cloud</q>; at
other times, when the spirits appeared in the air, they revealed their
presence by a draught of cold <q>wind.</q></note> the
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
ruler of the spirits, whose abode was beneath the earth,
or in the air by which we are surrounded. He was the
master of spells and incantations, of the magical formulæ
which enabled those who knew them to keep the evil
spirits at bay, or to turn their malice against an enemy.
Nippur was peculiarly the home of the darker side of
Babylonian religion; the teaching and influences that
emanated from it regarded the spirit-world as a world of
night and darkness, peopled by beings that were, for the
most part, hostile to man. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> or ghost belonged to
the realm of the dead rather than to that of the living,
and the female <foreign rend='italic'>lilîtu</foreign> was the ancestress of that Lilith
whom the Jewish Rabbis made a vampire under the form
of a beautiful woman, who lived on the blood of the
children she slew at night.
</p>

<p>
Eridu, on the contrary, was the seat of the Chaldæan
god of culture. Ea, whose home was in the deep,
among the waters of the Persian Gulf, had there his
temple, and it was there that he had taught the first
inhabitants of Babylonia all the elements of civilisation,
writing down for them the laws they should obey, the
moral code they should follow, and the healing spells
that prevented disease and death. He was the author
of all the arts of life, the all-wise god who knew the
things that benefited man; and his son and minister
Asari, who interpreted his will to his worshippers, received
the title of him <q>who does good to mankind.</q>
While El-lil of Nippur was the lord and creator of the
spirit-world, Ea was the lord and creator of men. He
had made man, like a potter, out of the clay, and to
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
him, therefore, man continued to look for guidance and
help.
</p>

<p>
The character of Ea was doubtless coloured by the
position of his city. The myth which spoke of him as
rising each morning out of the Persian Gulf to bring the
elements of culture to his people, clearly points to that
maritime intercourse with the coasts of Southern Arabia
which seems to have had a good deal to do with the
early civilisation of Babylonia. Foreign ideas made their
way into the country, trade brought culture in its train,
and it may be that the Semites, who exercised so profound
an influence upon Babylonia, first entered it
through the port of Eridu. However this may be, it was
at Eridu that the garden of the Babylonian Eden was
placed; here was <q>the centre of the earth</q>; here, too,
the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates were poured out
on either side from vases held by the god.<note place='foot'>See Pinches, <q>Certain Inscriptions and Records referring to Babylonia
and Elam,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Victoria Institute</hi>, xxix. p. 44:
<q>between the mouths of the rivers on both sides.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Until Eridu, however, is excavated with the same
systematic care as Nippur, we must be content to derive
our knowledge of it and of its influence upon the primitive
culture and religion of Babylonia from the records
which have been found elsewhere. That its sanctuary
was at least as old as that of Nippur, we may gather
from the fact that it was founded before the coast-line
had receded from the spot on which it stood. Its early
relations to Nippur must be left to the future to
disclose.
</p>

<p>
That neither Nippur nor Eridu should have been the
seat of a secular kingdom, is not so strange as at first
sight it appears to be. The priesthood of each must
have been too numerous and powerful to surrender its
rights to a single pontiff, or to allow such a pontiff to
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
wrest from it its authority in civil affairs. It is difficult
for a king to establish himself where a theocratic oligarchy
holds absolute sway, and the reverence in which
the temples and worship of El-lil and Ea were held
would have prevented the success of any attempt of the
kind. It was their sanctuaries which made Babylonia a
holy land, wherein all who could were buried after death.
Like Abydos in Egypt, Nippur or Eridu continued to be
a sanctuary, governed by its own hierarchy and enjoying
its own independent existence, while secular kingdoms
grew up at its side.<note place='foot'>It is significant that although the antediluvian kings enumerated by
Berossos must have belonged to Eridu, as is shown by their connection
with the Oannes-gods who rose from the Persian Gulf, they are not kings
of Eridu, but of Pantibibla and Larankha (which seems to have been the
Surippak of the cuneiform texts).</note>
</p>

<p>
Like Egypt, Babylonia was originally divided into
several independent States. From time to time one of
these became predominant, and obliged the other States
to acknowledge its supremacy. But the centre of power
shifted frequently, and it took many centuries before the
government became thoroughly centralised. The earlier
dynasties which claimed rule over the whole country had
at times to defend their claims by force of arms.
</p>

<p>
Like Egypt, too, Babylonia fell naturally into two
halves, Akkad in the north and Sumer in the south.
The recollection of the fact was preserved in the imperial
title of <q>king of Akkad and Sumer,</q> which thus corresponds
with the Egyptian title of <q>king of Upper and
Lower Egypt.</q> But whereas in Egypt the conquering
race moved from south to north, causing the name of
Upper Egypt to come first in the royal title, in
Babylonia it was the Semites of the northern half who
imposed their yoke upon the south. Akkad accordingly
takes precedence of Sumer.
</p>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<p>
I have said that the veil which has so long covered
the early history of the country is beginning at last to
be lifted. Rays of light are beginning to struggle
through the darkness, and we can at last form some idea
of the process which made Babylonia what it was in
later historical times. When the light first breaks upon
it, the leading kingdom, at all events in the north, is
Kis. Here a Semitic dynasty seems to have established
itself at an early period, and we hear of wars carried on
by it with its southern neighbours. Towards the south,
Lagas, the modern Tello, became the chief State under
its high priests, who made themselves kings. But Lagas,
like all the other petty kingdoms of the country, had at
length to submit to a Semitic power which grew up in
the north, and, after unifying Babylonia, created an
empire that extended to the shores of the Mediterranean.
This was the empire of Sargon of Akkad, and his son
Naram-Sin, whose date is fixed by the native annalists
at <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 3800, and whose importance for the history of
religion and culture throughout Western Asia can hardly
be overestimated.
</p>

<p>
Palestine and Syria&mdash;the land of the Amorites, as the
Babylonians called them&mdash;became a Babylonian province;
and a portion of a cadastral survey for the purposes of
taxation has come down to us, from which we learn that
it had been placed under a governor who bears the
Canaanitish name of Uru-Malik (Urimelech).<note place='foot'>Thureau-Dangin, in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue Sémitique</hi>.</note> Naram-Sin
carried his arms even into Magan, the Sinaitic
Peninsula, where he wrested from the Egyptians the
coveted mines of copper and malachite. Susa had long
been a Babylonian dependency; and as Mesopotamia,
including the later Assyria, also obeyed Babylonian rule,
the whole of Western Asia became Babylonian or, to use
the words of Sargon's Annals, <q>all countries were formed
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
together into one (empire).</q> Intercourse was kept up
between one part of the empire and the other by means
of high roads, along which the imperial post travelled
frequently. Some of the letters carried by it, with the
clay seals which served as stamps, are now in the museum
of the Louvre.<note place='foot'>Heuzey, <q>Sceaux inédits des rois d'Agadé,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie</hi>,
iv. 1, pp. 1-12.</note>
</p>

<p>
How long the empire of Sargon lasted is still uncertain.
But from that day onward the kings who claimed supreme
authority in Babylonia itself also claimed authority in
Syria; and from time to time they succeeded in enforcing
their claim. Erech and Ur now appear upon the scene,
and more than one imperial dynasty had its capital at
Ur. When the last of these fell, Babylonia passed for a
while into a state of decay and anarchy, a dynasty of
South Arabian or Canaanitish origin established itself at
Babylon; while Elamite princes seized Larsa, and compelled
the southern half of the country to pay them
tribute. A deliverer finally arose, in the person of Khammurabi
or Ammurapi, of the Arabian dynasty; he drove
the Elamites out of Babylonia, defeated Arioch of Larsa,
captured his capital, and once more united Babylonia
under a single head, with its centre at Babylon. From
henceforth Babylon remained the capital of the monarchy,
and the sacred city of Western Asia. The national
revival was accompanied by a literary revival as well.
Poets and writers arose whose works became classical;
new copies and editions were made of ancient books,
and the theology of Babylonia was finally systematised.
Under Khammurabi and his immediate successors we
may place the consummation of that gradual process of
development which had reduced the discordant elements
of Babylonian society and religion into a single harmonious
system.
</p>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
This theological system, however, cannot be understood,
unless we bear in mind that, as in Egypt so too in
Babylonia, there was originally a number of small independent
principalities, each with its tutelary deity and
special sanctuary. The head of the State was the <foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign>,
or high priest of the god, his vicar and representative
upon earth, and the interpreter of the divine commands
to men. At the outset, therefore, Babylonian government
was essentially theocratic; and this theocratic character
clung to it to the last. It was this which made
Babylon a sacred city, whose priests had the power of
conferring the right to rule upon whom they would, like
the Pope in the Middle Ages. Though the high priest
became in time a king, he never divested himself of his
sacerdotal mantle, or forgot that he was the adopted son
of his god.<note place='foot'>It is to this adoption by the god that the phrase met with in early
Sumerian texts&mdash;<q>the king (or the man) the son of his god</q>&mdash;probably
refers, though it may possibly have eventually come to be synonymous
with <q>pious man.</q> Professor Hommel compares Hebrew names like Ben-Ammi,
<q>the son of (the god) Ammi.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The tutelary gods followed the fortunes of the cities
over whose destinies they watched. The rise of a city
to power meant the supremacy also of the divinity to
whom it was dedicated; its decay involved his decline.
The gods of the subject cities were the vassals of the
deity of the dominant State; when the kings of Ur were
supreme in Babylonia, the moon-god of Ur was supreme
as well. Similarly the rise of Babylon brought with it
the supremacy of Merodach, the god of Babylon, who
henceforward became the Bel or <q>Lord</q> of the whole
pantheon.
</p>

<p>
A god who had once occupied so exalted a position
could not, however, be easily deposed. Babylonian
history preserved the memory of the ruling dynasties
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
whose suzerainty had been acknowledged throughout the
country, and Babylonian religion equally remembered the
gods whose servants and representatives they had been.
A god who had once been supreme over Babylonia could
not again occupy a lower seat; it was necessary to find
a place for him by the side of the younger deity, whose
position was merely that of a chief among his peers.
When Babylon became the capital, the older seats of
empire still claimed equality with her, and the priestly
hierarchies of Ur or Erech or Sippara still accounted
themselves the equals of her priesthood. The ancient
sanctuaries survived, with their cults unimpaired and
their traditions still venerated; and the reverence paid
to the sanctuary and its ministers was reflected back
upon the god.
</p>

<p>
Hence it was that at the head of the official faith
there stood a group of supreme gods, each with his rank
and powers definitely fixed, and each worshipped in some
one of the great cities of the kingdom. But the system
of which they formed part was necessarily of artificial
origin. It was the work of a theological school, such as
was made possible by the existence of the primeval
sanctuaries of Nippur and Eridu. Without these latter
the organisation of Babylonian religion would have been
imperfect or impossible. But from the earliest days
of Babylonian civilisation, Nippur and Eridu had alike
exercised a unifying influence on the diverse and discordant
elements of which the population was composed;
they were centres, not only of religion, but of culture as
well, and this culture was essentially religious. For unnumbered
centuries the gods of Nippur and Eridu were
acknowledged as supreme by all the inhabitants of the
country, whatever might be their race or the particular
local divinities they adored, and the religious teaching of
the priests of Nippur and Eridu was accepted as the inspired
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
utterances of heaven. When Babylon became
at length the capital of a united monarchy under an
Arabian dynasty, the ancient gods of Nippur and Eridu
yielded to its <foreign rend='italic'>parvenu</foreign> deity only under protest; despite
the fact that the city of Merodach had been the leader
in the national war of independence, Merodach himself
had to be identified with the son of Ea of Eridu, and the
title of Bel which he wrested from El-lil of Nippur was
never acknowledged at Nippur itself. There at least
the old <q>Lord of the ghost-world</q> still remained for his
worshippers the <q>Lord</q> of all the gods.
</p>

<p>
The title had been given him by the Semites, though
the sanctuary in which he was worshipped was of
Sumerian or non-Semitic foundation. The fact introduces
us to the last point on which I wish to touch in
the present lecture. The population of Babylonia was
not homogeneous. The Chaldæan historian Berossos
tells us how, at the beginning of the world, races of
various origin were gathered together in it; and the statement
has been fully confirmed by the monuments. Two
main races were represented in the country. One of
these, usually termed Sumerian, spoke an agglutinative
language, and came, perhaps, from the mountainous
regions of Elam; the other were the Semites, whose first
home was, I believe, in Arabia. The Sumerians were
the first in the land. To them were due the elements of
Babylonian civilisation; they were the first to drain the
marshes and cultivate the soil, to build the temples and
cities, and to invent&mdash;or at all events to develop&mdash;that
system of pictorial writing out of which the cuneiform
characters gradually arose. They were, too, the first to
carry the culture they had created among the neighbouring
populations of Western Asia. The result was that
their language and script spread far and wide; wherever
proto-Chaldæan civilisation extended, the proto-Chaldæan
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
language went with it. And along with the language
and literature there went also the theology of primitive
Babylonia. The names of the Sumerian divinities made
their way into other lands, and the dialects of the Semitic
tribes were profoundly affected by the forms of Sumerian
speech. The earliest civilisation of Western Asia was
Sumerian.
</p>

<p>
But a time came when the Sumerian was supplanted
by the Semite. It was in Northern Babylonia that the
Semite first predominated. Here the empire of Sargon
of Akkad grew up, and the cuneiform syllabary became
an imperfect means for expressing the sounds of a Semitic
language. From Northern Babylonia Semitic influences
passed into the south, a mixed Semitic and Sumerian
population came into existence, and the Babylonians of
history were born. The mixed population necessarily
had a mixed language, and a composite culture produced
a composite theology. To disentangle the elements of
this theology is the first and most pressing task of its
historian; but it is a task full of difficulties, which the
native theologians themselves not unfrequently failed to
overcome.
</p>

<p>
The union of Sumerian and Semite created the Babylonian
with whom we have to deal, just as the union of
Kelt and Teuton has created the Englishman of to-day.
Other races, it is true, settled in his country in subsequent
ages, but their influence was comparatively slight
and transitory. At one time non-Semitic Elamites from
the east overran both Babylonia and the district of Susa,
which up to that time had been a Babylonian province,
and founded a dynasty at Babylon which lasted for nearly
six hundred years. But, like the Hyksos dynasties in
Egypt, it made but little permanent impression upon the
people; in character and religion they remained what
they were before. Nor did the irruption of Bedâwin
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
tribes and other more pure-blooded representatives of the
Semitic race have a greater effect. They were rather
influenced by the Babylonians than the Babylonians by
them. Their own culture was inferior, and Babylonia
was their teacher in the arts and comforts of life. The
wild Bedâwin, who tended the flocks of their Babylonian
masters, the Amorite merchants from Canaan, who
formed trading settlements in the Babylonian cities, even
the South Arabian princes who headed the national
revolt against Elamite supremacy and made Babylon the
capital of their kingdom, were all alike absorbed into
the Babylonian race. They became the children of
Babylonian civilisation, and, along with the culture, they
adopted the language of the Babylonian people. The
mixed race which had produced the civilisation of Babylonia,
was destined to retain its individuality unimpaired
down to the day when Europe took the place of Asia in
the history of the civilised world.
</p>

<p>
But the fact of the mixture must never be lost sight
of. Without it, Babylonian religion, like the Babylonian
system of writing, would be a hopeless puzzle. We
could, indeed, draw up long lists of obscure deities with
unmeaning names, and enumerate the titles which the
inscriptions give them, but any attempt to trace their
history or discover the religious ideas of which they are
the expression, would be impossible. We must know
what is Semitic and what is Sumerian, or what is due to
a combination of the two elements, before we can penetrate
to the heart of the old Babylonian theology, and
ascertain the principles on which it rests. The native
writers themselves were aware of this, and fully realised
the fact that Sumerian conceptions of the godhead formed
the background of the official faith. But their uncritical
efforts to solve the problem of the origin of their religion
have added only to the complication of it. Just as the
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
English lexicographers of a past generation found a Greek
or Latin derivation for the Teutonic words of our language,
so the scholars of Babylonia discovered Sumerian etymologies
for Semitic words and divine names, or else assimilated
them to other words of a different origin. Thus the
Semitic word <foreign rend='italic'>Sabattu</foreign>, <q>Sabbath,</q> is derived from the
Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>sa</foreign>, <q>heart,</q> and <foreign rend='italic'>bat</foreign>, <q>to cease</q> or <q>rest,</q> and
interpreted as <q>a day of rest for the heart</q>; while <foreign rend='italic'>pardêṡu</foreign>,
<q>paradise,</q> is explained as the <foreign rend='italic'>par</foreign> or <q>domain of the
god Eṡu.</q><note place='foot'>A. H. 83-1-18, 1866, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> v., published by Pinches in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, xviii. 8 (1896), and explained by
him, p. 255. I should myself prefer to render Par-Eṡu <q>the land of the
offspring of the god Eṡu</q> (or Esau).</note> In many cases it is as yet impossible to tell
whether a native etymology really rests on a fact of
history, or is the invention of learned pedantry or popular
etymologising. Marduk or Merodach, for instance, is
variously derived from the Sumerian Amar-utuki, <q>the
heifer of the sun-spirit</q>; and the Semitic Mar-Eridugga,
<q>the son of the city Eridu.</q><note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, p. 107, note.</note> The first etymology is
certainly false; our present materials do not allow us to
speak so positively in regard to the second. All we can
say about it is that it is unlikely in the extreme.
</p>

<p>
And yet a good deal turns upon the true origin of the
name of the patron god of Babylon. If it is Semitic, the
foundation of the city and of the temple around which it
was built would presumably belong to Semitic days, and
the development of the cult of the god would be Semitic
from the first. The identification of Merodach, moreover,
with Asari the son of Ea of Eridu, would receive
substantial support; the <q>son of Eridu</q> would naturally
be the son of the god of Eridu, and we should have to
see in Babylon a colony from the old seaport of the
Babylonian plain.
</p>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<p>
The divergent etymologies, however, assigned to the
name of Merodach by the theologians of Babylonia show
that they were quite as much in the dark as we are in
regard to its origin and significance. Its derivation had
been already lost in the night of time; the worship of
the god and the building of his sanctuary went back to
ages too remote for the memory of man. And yet
Merodach was one of the youngest gods in the Babylonian
pantheon. By the side of Ea of Eridu or El-lil of
Nippur he was but a child, the offspring of a later day;
and even when he became supreme in Babylonia, the fact
that he was so was still remembered. If it is difficult
to trace the earliest lineaments of Merodach, how much
more difficult must it be to trace those of the older
gods!
</p>

<p>
The theology of Babylonia, as it is known to us, is thus
an artificial product. It combines two wholly different
forms of faith and religious conception. One of these
was overlaid by the other at a very early period in the
history of the people, and the theological beliefs of Sumer
received a Semitic interpretation. This natural process
of combination and assimilation was followed by an
artificial attempt to weld the whole into a consistent and
uniform shape. An artificial system took the place of
natural growth, and the punning etymologies which
accompanied it were but an illustration of the principles
that underlay its methods. If we would successfully
analyse the theology which has come down to us, we
must, as it were, get behind it and discover the elements
of which it was composed. We must separate and distinguish
Sumerian and Semitic, must trace the influences
they exerted upon one another, and, above all, must
detect and discard the misinterpretations and accretions
of the later systematic theology. For such an undertaking,
it is true, our materials are still miserably scanty,
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
and, with imperfect materials, the results also can be imperfect
only. But all pioneering work is necessarily
imperfect, and for many a day to come the history of
Babylonian religion must be left to the pioneer. Year
by year, indeed, the materials are increasing, and it may
be that a discovery will yet be made, like that of the
Pyramid texts in Egypt, which will reveal to us the inner
religious thought and belief of Babylonia in those distant
ages, when Nippur and Eridu, and not as yet Babylon,
were the theological centres of the land. Even now we
possess inscriptions of the Sumerian epoch, which tell us
the names of the gods who were worshipped by the kings
of the pre-Semitic age, and throw light on the religious
ideas which animated them, and the religious ritual
which they observed. But such inscriptions are still
comparatively few, their translation is full of difficulties,
and the references contained in them to the theology of
the time are scanty and unsatisfactory. And the most
important of them&mdash;those of the high priests of Tello&mdash;belong
to an epoch when the Semite had been for many
centuries in the land, influencing and being influenced
by his Sumerian neighbours. Though Lagas was still
Sumerian, its overlord was the Semitic king of Ur.<note place='foot'>This at least was the ease in the time of Gudea, to whom we owe all
the more important theological references found in the Tello texts.</note>
</p>

<p>
You must not, therefore, expect either so complete or
so detailed an account of Babylonian religion as that
which it is now possible to give of the religion of Egypt.
There are no pictures from the walls of tombs, no bas-reliefs
from the temples, to help us; we have to depend
almost wholly on the literature that has come down to
us, mutilated and only half examined as it is. Our
efforts to interpret it are without the assistance of
pictorial representations such as are at the disposal of
the Egyptologist; they rest upon philology alone, and
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
the element of uncertainty in them is therefore considerable.
</p>

<p>
The advances made in our knowledge of Babylonian
religion, since I lectured upon it some fifteen years ago,
are consequently not so great as the inexperienced
student might be tempted to believe. There are some
things to be added, there is more to be corrected, but the
main facts and principles which I then tried to place
before the world of scholars remain intact. In some
cases confirmation has come of suggestions which seemed
only possible or probable; in other cases others have
worked with greater success and better materials upon
the foundations which I laid. If, therefore, the progress
made during the past few years may appear disappointing,
there is no reason for surprise; the fault lies not
with the Assyriologist, but with the materials with which
he has to deal. The labourer is ready, but the harvest
is not yet ripe.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture II. Primitive Animism.</head>

<p>
Deep down in the very core of Babylonian religion lay a
belief in what Professor Tylor has called animism. It
belonged to the Sumerian element in the faith of the
people, and, as we shall see, was never really assimilated
by the Semitic settlers. But in spite of Semitic influences
and official attempts to explain it away, it was
never eradicated from the popular creed, and it left a
permanent impress upon the folk-lore and superstitions of
the nation. As in Egypt, so too in Babylonia, animism
was the earliest shape assumed by religion, and it was
through animism that the Sumerian formed his conception
of the divine.
</p>

<p>
In Egypt it was the <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> which linked <q>the other
world</q> with that of living men. In Babylonia the place
of the <foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign> was taken by the <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign>. We may translate Zi
by <q>spirit,</q> but like the Ka it was rather a double than
a spirit in our sense of the term. Literally the word
signified <q>life,</q> and was symbolised in the primitive
picture-writing of the country by a flowering plant.
Life, however, meant a great deal more to early man
than it does to us. It was synonymous with motion,
with force and energy. All that moved was endowed
with life; life was the only force known to man which
explained motion, and, conversely, motion was the sign
and manifestation of life. The arrow which sped through
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
the air or the rock which fell from the cliff did so in
virtue of their possessing life, or because the motive
force of life lay in some way or other behind them. The
stars which slowly moved through the sky, and the sun
which rose and set day by day, were living beings; it was
life which gave them the power of movement, as it gave
the power of movement to man himself and the animals
by whom he was surrounded. The power of movement,
in fact, separated the animate from the inanimate; all
that moved possessed life; the motionless was lifeless
and dead. Man's experience was necessarily his measure
of the universe; the only force he knew of was the force
we call life, and his reason seemed to demand that what
held true of himself must hold true also of the rest of the
world.
</p>

<p>
But, like the Egyptian, the Sumerian could not conceive
of life except under visible and concrete form.
The abstract was still embedded, as it were, in the concrete;
it could not be divorced from it in thought any
more than in those pictorial characters which were used
by the scribes. What we mean by <q>force</q> would have
been unintelligible to the primitive Babylonian; for
him life was something real and material, which had a
shape of its own, even though this shape was but an unsubstantial
shadow, seen indeed by the eye, but eluding
the grasp. At the same time it was more than a shadow,
for it possessed all the qualities of the object or person
to whom it belonged. It was not life in the abstract,
but the counterpart of an individual object, which endowed
that object with the power of motion, and gave it
a place in the animate world.
</p>

<p>
The Sumerian Zi, therefore, closely resembled the
Egyptian Ka. The human Zi was the imperishable part
of man; it made him a living soul while he was in this
world, and after death continued to represent him in the
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
shadowy world below.<note place='foot'>Thus we have the phrase <q>to swear by the <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign> of the king</q> (see
Delitzsch, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisches Handwörterbuch</hi>, s.v. <hi rend='italic'>nisu</hi>). The Zi included the
<foreign rend='italic'>ekim</foreign> or specific ghost, whose prominence belongs rather to post-Sumerian
days than to the early ages of Babylonian history.</note> Unlike the <foreign rend='italic'>lilla</foreign> or <q>ghost,</q> it
represented the man himself in his personality; if that
personality were destroyed, it also ceased to exist. While
on the one side it was the Zi which gave man life and
the power of movement, on the other side, without the
individual man there could be no individual Zi. Food
and drink were offered to the Babylonian dead as they
were to the Egyptian, and the objects the dead man had
loved during his lifetime were deposited in his grave.
His seal was attached to his wrist, his spear or staff was
laid at his side, and at times even dates or fish or
poultry were buried with him, lest he might feel hungry
in the darkness of the tomb. The child had his favourite
toys to play with, the woman her necklace of beads.
The water-jar was there, filled with <q>the pure water</q>
for which the dead thirsted, along with the bowl of clay
or bronze out of which it might be drunk. <q>A garment
to clothe him,</q> says an old hymn, <q>and shoes for his
feet, a girdle for his loins and a water-skin for drinking,
and food for his journey have I given him.</q><note place='foot'>King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion</hi>, p. 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like men, the gods too had each his Zi. We hear of
the Zi of Ea, the god of the deep;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 36. 54, 56. 33-38.</note> and the primeval
<q>mother, who had begotten heaven and earth,</q> was
Zi-kum or Zi-kura, <q>the life of heaven</q> and <q>earth.</q><note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures on <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion</hi>, p. 375. A common
phrase is <q>the Zi (Assyr. <foreign rend='italic'>nis</foreign>) of the great gods</q> (Delitzsch, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisches
Handwörterbuch</hi>, s.v. <foreign rend='italic'>nisu</foreign>). In the incantation text, <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 1, 2, the
gods of later times are still <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign>s. A translation of part of the text will be
given in a future chapter. For the possibility that the Zi and the Lil
originally had much the same meaning, the one being used at Eridu and
the other at Nippur, see the next lecture.</note>
</p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
In the early magical texts <q>the Zi of heaven</q> and the
<q>Zi of earth</q> are invoked to remove the spell that has
been cast over the sick or the insane. Even when Ea
and his son Asari had taken the place of the demons of
the older faith, the official religion was still compelled to
recognise their existence and power. The formula of
exorcism put into the mouth of Ea himself ends with an
appeal to the <q>life</q> of heaven and earth. It begins,
indeed, with <q>the charm of Ea,</q> through the efficacy of
which the evil spell is to be dissolved; but the charm of
the god of wisdom is soon forgotten, and it is to the Zi of
heaven and earth that the exorcist finally has recourse.
<q>O life of heaven, mayest thou conjure it; O life of
earth, mayest thou conjure it!</q> thus, and thus only,
could the exorcism end. The old associations were too
strong to be overcome, and the worshippers of Ea had to
allow a place at his side for the <q>spirits</q> of an earlier
age.
</p>

<p>
The ancient conception of the Zi lingered long among
the Babylonian population. But, as the Semitic element
became predominant, it fell more and more into the
background, and survived&mdash;so far at least as the official
religion was concerned&mdash;only in a few old formulæ and
names. One of the fixed stars, for example, was called
Sib-zi-Anna, <q>the Shepherd of the Life of Heaven,</q> and a
common form of oath was by <q>the life of the gods</q> or
<q>king</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nis ilâni</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>nis sarri</foreign>). Even Sennacherib swears
by <q>the life of Assur</q>; but it is questionable whether
either he or any of his contemporaries remembered
the original meaning and history of the phrase. The
Sumerian Zi had received a Semitic translation, and
therewith a Semitic connotation. The ideas attached to
the Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>nêsu</foreign> were not those which had once clustered
around the Zi. On the lips of the Semite even the
word Zi itself meant <q>life</q> and little more. When
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
Pur-Sin <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> of Ur, a century or two before Abraham,
addresses a dedication in Sumerian to the moon-god, he
calls himself <q>the divine <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign> of his country</q><note place='foot'>Scheil in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xxii. p. 38.</note>&mdash;in other
words, a <q>god who gives life to his land.</q> There is no
question here of a vital force which is the counterpart of
a man or god; we have, on the contrary, the Semitic
conception of a divine father from whom his people
derive their life. The Semite has transferred his own
ideas to the language of his Sumerian predecessors, and
<q>life</q> for him is no materialised reflection of an individual
thing, but a principle which is diffused, as it
were, from a divine centre. The <q>Zi of heaven</q> has
become the abstract life, which the god can communicate
to those about him.
</p>

<p>
It is only in the dim background of history, therefore,
that we find in Babylonia a belief analogous to that
which created the Egyptian doctrine of the Ka. It was
foreign to the Semitic mind, and with the rise of Semitic
supremacy, accordingly, it disappeared from the religion
of Babylonia. We have to look for its fossilised relics in
the old magical texts, which, like the spells and charms of
modern folk-lore, have preserved so many of the beliefs
and superstitions of an otherwise forgotten past, or else
in divine names and epithets which go back to a remote
antiquity. The animism of the Sumerian is difficult
to discover and trace, for it was already buried under
Semitic modes of thought when the first libraries of
Babylonia were being formed.
</p>

<p>
It was another Sumerian belief which exercised a
greater influence upon the Semitic mind. This was the
belief in ghosts. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> or ghost was distinct from the
<foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign>; while the <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign> belonged to the world of the living, the
<foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> belonged to the world of the dead. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> consequently
was no counterpart or double of either man or
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
god, but a being with an independent existence of its
own. Its home was beneath the earth, where the dead
had their dwelling; but it visited this upper world under
the shadow of night, or in desert places to which nothing
living came.<note place='foot'>See Sm. 1981. 3, where the <foreign rend='italic'>edinna</foreign> or <q>desert</q> is called the home of
the <foreign rend='italic'>lilla</foreign>.</note> It was essentially a spirit of darkness, and
one of the names by which it was known was that of
<q>the light-despoiler.</q><note place='foot'>Uda-kára.</note> It came in the raging wind
which darkens the heaven with clouds, or in the cloud of
dust which betokens the approach of the storm. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>,
in fact, was essentially a demon, <q>without husband or
wife,</q> one of those evil spirits who tormented and perplexed
mankind.
</p>

<p>
The sexless Lil was waited on by <q>a maid,</q> who
under the cover of night enticed men to their destruction,
or seduced them in their dreams. She was a veritable
vampire, providing the Lil she served with its human
food. When the Semite succeeded to the heritage of the
Sumerian, the sexless Lil disappeared. Semitic grammar
demanded that there should be a distinction between
masculine and feminine, and Semitic modes of thought
equally demanded that a female Lilît should take her
place by the side of a male Lilu. The attributes of the
<q>serving-maid</q> of the Sumerian Lil were transferred to
the new creation of the Semitic mind, and the siren who
lured men to their destruction ceased to be a serving-maid,
and became the female Lilît herself. But the
origin of the powers she exercised was never forgotten.
When the name and character of the Babylonian Lilît
were borrowed by the Hebrews under the form of Lilith,
she was conceived of as a single individual spirit rather
than as a class. Isaiah (xxxiv. 14) tells us how Lilith
shall haunt the desolate ruins of Edom, and find among
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
them <q>a place of rest</q>; while, according to the Rabbis,
Lilith had been the first wife of man, in appearance the
fairest of women, but in reality a vampire demon who
sucked at night the blood of her victims.
</p>

<p>
The lord and ruler of the Lils was the god who was
worshipped at Nippur. He bore, accordingly, the title
of En-lil, <q>the lord of the ghost-world,</q> and his temple
was one of the oldest sanctuaries of Sumerian Babylonia.<note place='foot'>By assimilation En-lil became El-lil. The name is literally <q>ghost-lord,</q>
where the singular <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> represents a class. Hence En-lil is <q>lord of
the ghosts</q> in general, conceived of as <q>the devil</q> is often conceived of in
Christian literature, or as Hades sometimes meant all the denizens of the
underworld in Greek. Dialectic forms of the name are Mul-lil and U-lil.</note>
It was a centre of primeval civilisation, and the source
of the magical arts which gathered round the belief in
the spirits of the underworld. But the lordship of the
underworld implied also a lordship over the earth, of
which it formed a part. En-lil, <q>the lord of the ghost-world,</q>
thus became in time the ruler, not only of the
dead, but also of the living. His empire ceased to be
confined to the realms of darkness, and was extended to
this upper world of light and of mankind. Up to the
last, however, his primitive character was never forgotten.
In the story of the Deluge he appears as the
destroyer of men; Namtar, the plague-demon, is his
minister; and like Kingu, the demon-god of chaos, he
wore the tablets of destiny, which determine when men
shall die.<note place='foot'>Under Semitic influence these <q>tablets of destiny</q> lost their primitive
signification, and became, like the Urim and Thummim of the Old
Testament, simply a means of predicting the future.</note>
</p>

<p>
En-lil was accordingly the sovereign of the dead as
well as of the spirits of the underworld. The Sumerian
<foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> must therefore have once included the ghosts of
men as well as other ghosts which never had a material
existence in the flesh. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> must once have meant
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
that immaterial part of man which, after death, had its
home in the underworld, from whence it issued at night
to satisfy its cravings for food with the garbage of the
streets. By the side of the Zi there must also have
been the Lil; but we must wait till more monuments of
Sumerian antiquity are discovered before we can define
the exact relationship between them.<note place='foot'>At Eridu the Zi seems to have taken the place occupied by the Lil at
Nippur; at all events, just as En-lil was the chief Lil or Lilla at Nippur,
so Ea seems to have been the chief Zi at Eridu. On this see the next
lecture.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Epic of Gilgames it is said that when the shade
of Ea-bani was called up from the dead, like that of the
shade of Samuel by the Witch of Endor, <q>it arose from
the earth like a cloud of dust.</q><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Zaqiqu</foreign> is of course a <q>cloud of dust,</q> not <q>a wind,</q> as some scholars
have translated it. A wind does not rise up out of the earth, but comes
from the air or sky. In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 6, vi. 64, the meaning of <foreign rend='italic'>zaqiqi</foreign> can be
<q>dust</q> and nothing else: <foreign rend='italic'>ilâni-su istarâti-su amnâ ana zakiki</foreign>, <q>its
gods and goddesses I reduced to dust.</q></note> It was fitting that the
ghost should be likened to a dust-storm. Its home was
in the ground; and there, in the dark underworld, its
food, we are told, was dust. But the word used by the
poet for the ghost of Ea-bani is not <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>. It is another
word, utukku, which occurs frequently in the magical
texts. Here the <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> is a general name for a demon,
and we hear of the <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> <q>of the field,</q> <q>of the
mountain,</q> <q>of the sea,</q> and <q>of the grave.</q> The
<q><foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> of the grave</q> must be the restless ghost of
some dead man which has become a spirit of darkness,
working evil to mankind. The ordinary <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign>, however,
had no human ancestry; it was a demon pure and
simple, which sat upon the neck of the sufferer and
inflicted upon him pain and death. It corresponded
with the vampire of European folk-lore; and just as the
ranks of the vampire might be recruited from the dead,
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
so too might the class of demons whom the Babylonians
termed <foreign rend='italic'>utukki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
It was the same with another species of demon, the
<foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>, which hovered around the tomb and attacked
the loins of those who fell in its way. But the <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>
was a being whose origin was known. It was the spirit
of an unburied corpse over whose unsanctified remains
the funeral rites had never been performed. The mystic
ceremonies and magical words which consigned the dead
to their last resting-place had been neglected, and the
hapless spirit was left unprovided with the talismans
that would enable him to cross the river of death, or
join his comrades in the passive tranquillity of the
lower world. Restlessly, therefore, it wandered about
the desert places of the earth, finding at times a shelter
in the bodies of the living, whom it plagued with sore
diseases, and seeking to satiate its hunger under the
cover of night with the refuse it could pick up <q>in the
street.</q> The food and drink which pious hands laid in
the tomb were denied to the tombless ghost, and it had
to search for them where it could. The Epic of Gilgames
concludes with a description of it, which paints in vivid
colours the old Babylonian belief&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>He whose body lies forsaken in the field,</q></l>
<l>As thou and I alike have seen,</l>
<l>His <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign> rests not in the earth.</l>
<l>He whose <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign> has none to care for him,</l>
<l>As thou and I alike have seen,</l>
<l>The garbage of the pot, the refuse of food,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Which is thrown into the street, must he eat.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It is no wonder that a Babylonian king prays that the
body of his enemy may be <q>cast aside, and no grave
allowed to him,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 61, vi. 54, 55, where we must read <foreign rend='italic'>kibira</foreign>.</note> or that Assur-bani-pal should have
torn the bodies of the Elamite kings from their tombs
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
at Susa. Sennacherib similarly desecrated the burial-places
of the ancestors of Merodach-baladan; and one of
the oldest of Babylonian monuments, the so-called Stela
of the Vultures, depicts the bodies of the slaughtered
enemy exposed to the vultures that feed upon them,
while the slain Babylonians themselves are buried by
their companions under a tumulus of earth.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign> was thus, properly speaking, the ghost
of the unburied corpse; whereas the <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> was the
ghost of a corpse which had obtained burial, but through
some accident or other had escaped from the realms of
the dead. While, therefore, the <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign> necessarily had
a human origin, the <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> was only accidentally a
human ghost. The rites with which its body had
been laid in the grave, ought to have confined it to the
underground regions of the dead; and the <q>pure water</q>
and food with which it had been provided were sufficient
to sustain it in its existence below. If it returned to the
upper world it could only have been through the arts of
the necromancer, and the sufferings it may have inflicted
upon men were but the revenge it took for being disturbed.
The <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign>, like the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>, belonged to a class of
supernatural beings who manifested their presence in a
particular way, and it was only as it were accidentally
that the ghost of a dead man came to be included among
them.
</p>

<p>
But it must be noticed that no distinction was drawn
in the mind of the Babylonian between these supernatural
beings and the ghosts of the dead, at all events
so far as their nature and to a certain extent their
powers were concerned. The ghost might become an
<foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign> just as it might become a <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>; all were alike
denizens of the underground world, and in primeval
times obeyed the rule of the En-lil, <q>the lord of
ghosts.</q>
</p>

<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>

<p>
The same belief must once have prevailed in Palestine.
When the spirit of Samuel was called up from
the dead, the witch declared she saw Elohim rising up
from the earth in the form of an old man clothed in a
mantle. Now Elohim or <q>gods</q> was the general term
under which the Canaanite included all the beings of
the spiritual world in whom he believed; and in calling
the spirit of Samuel <q>Elohim,</q> the witch was accordingly
asserting that the human ghost she had evoked
had become thereby one of them. As the ghost of
Ea-bani when summoned from its resting-place became
an <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign>, so the ghost of Samuel for the same reason
became one of the Elohim.
</p>

<p>
The ghost, like the body to which it had belonged, was
dependent for its existence upon food and drink. The
legend of the descent of Istar into Hades describes the
ghosts of the dead as flitting like winged bats through
their gloomy prison-house, drinking dust and eating clay.
The bread and dates and water offered at the tombs of
the dead were a welcome substitute for such nauseous
food. Food, however, of some kind it was necessary for
the ghost to have, otherwise it would have suffered from
the pangs of hunger, or died the second death for want
of nourishment.
</p>

<p>
Like the Egyptian Ka, consequently, the Babylonian
ghost was conceived of as a semi-material counterpart of
the body, needing, like the body, drink and food; and if
recalled to the upper world in the form of an <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign> or
an <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>, resembling the body in every detail, even to
the clothes it wore. Moreover, as in Egypt, the doctrine
of the double must be extended to inanimate objects as
well as to living things. The offerings deposited with
the dead included not only poultry and fish, but also
dates and grain, wine and water. The objects, too, which
the dead had loved in his life were laid in his grave&mdash;toys
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
for the child, mirrors and jewellery for the woman, the
staff and the seal for the man. It must have been the
doubles of the food and drink upon which the ghost fed
in the world below, and the doubles of the other objects
buried with the corpse, which it enjoyed in its new mode
of existence. There must have been ghosts of things as
well as ghosts of men.
</p>

<p>
The overlaying of primitive Sumerian animism by
Semitic conceptions and beliefs naturally introduced new
elements into the views held about the imperishable part
of man, and profoundly modified the old theories regarding
it. The Zi, as we have seen, became synonymous with
the vital principle; the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>, the <foreign rend='italic'>utukku</foreign>, and the <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>
were banished to the domain of the magician and witch.
The words survived, like <q>ghost</q> in English, but the
ideas connected with them insensibly changed. In place
of En-lil, <q>the lord of the ghost-world,</q> a new conception
arose, that of Bilu or Baal, <q>the lord</q> of mankind and
the visible universe, whose symbol was the flaming sun.<note place='foot'>Professor Hommel has shown that among the Arabian and Western
Semites (the Canaanites excepted) the original Baal was rather the moon-god
than the sun-god. The supremacy of the sun-god belongs to Semitic
Babylonia (<hi rend='italic'>Aufsätze und Abhandlungen</hi>, ii. pp. 149-165).</note>
The ghosts had to make way for living men, the underground
world of darkness for the world of light. En-lil
became a Semitic Baal, and man himself became <q>the son
of his god.</q><note place='foot'>With this phrase, which is so frequent in the Babylonian texts,
Hommel compares names like Ben-Ammi, <q>the son of (the god) Ammi.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
With the rise of Semitic influence came also the
influence of the culture that emanated from Eridu. The
character of Ea of Eridu lent itself more readily to
Semitic conceptions than did the character of En-lil.
There was no need for violent change; the old Sumerian
god (or rather <q>spirit</q>) retained his name and therewith
many of his ancient attributes. He remained the god of
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
wisdom and culture, the father of Aṡari, <q>who does good
to man.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Asari was identified with Merodach the sun-god
of Babylon, Semitic influence was already in the ascendant.
Merodach was already a Semitic Baal; the supremacy of
his city made him the supreme Baal of Babylonia. The
older Baal of Nippur was absorbed by the younger Baal
of Babylon, and the official cult almost ceased to remember
what his attributes and character had originally been.
Even the reciter of the magical texts probably forgot that
the god had once been a chief <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> or ghost and nothing more.
</p>

<p>
This altered conception of the god of Nippur was
necessarily accompanied by an altered conception of the
ghost-world over which he had ruled. It was handed
over to other gods in the State religion, or else passed
into the possession of the wizard and necromancer. Nergal
of Cutha became the lord of Hades, which he shared with
the goddess Eris-kigal or Allat. Legend told how at the
command of the gods of light, Nergal had forced his way
into the dark recesses of the underworld, and there compelled
the goddess to become his bride. From henceforward
Hades was a realm under the control of the gods
of heaven, and part of that orderly universe which they
governed and directed.
</p>

<p>
The conquest of Hades by the gods of light implied
the conquest by them of death. The dead was no longer
a mere ghost, beyond the reach of the lords of heaven,
and able to play havoc in their own sphere when darkness
had swallowed up the light. The lords of heaven now
claimed the power of <q>raising the dead to life.</q> It is
an epithet that is applied more especially to Merodach,
the minister and interpreter of his father Ea, through
whose magic words and wise teaching he heals the diseases
of mankind, and even brings them again from the world
of the dead.
</p>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<p>
It is evident that we here have a new conception
before us of the imperishable part of man. The gods
are with man beyond the grave as they are on this side
of it. There is no inexorable destiny forbidding them to
bring him back to life. In other words, there is a life
in the next world as well as in this. It may be a very
inferior and shadowy kind of life, but it is a life nevertheless,
and not the existence of a bloodless ghost which
would perish if it could not satisfy its cravings with food
and drink. The religious consciousness has passed beyond
the stage when the future world is peopled with the
doubles and counterparts of existing things, and it has
attained to the conception of a spiritual life which man
can share with the immortal gods. Animism has made
way for polytheism.
</p>

<p>
How close this connection between the gods and the
souls of men became in later days, may be seen from the
fact that when Assur-bani-pal visited the tombs of his
forefathers, he poured out a libation in their honour and
addressed to them his prayers. They had, in short,
become gods, like the gods of light to whom temples
were erected and offerings made. The change in point
of view had doubtless been quickened by that deification
of the king of which I shall have to speak in a future
lecture, and which seems to have been of Semitic origin.
When the king became a god, to whom priests and
temples were dedicated both in his lifetime and after his
death, it was inevitable that new ideas should arise in
regard to the nature of the soul. The spirit who was
addressed as a god, and set on a level with the divine
lords of heaven, was no powerless and starveling ghost
in the underworld of En-lil, but a spirit in the more
modern sense of the word, who dwelt in the realms of
light, where he could hear and answer the prayers that
were laid before him. The ghost had been transformed
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
into a soul, whose nature was the same as that of the
gods themselves, and which, like them accordingly, could
move freely where it would, listening to the petitions
of those on earth, and interceding for them.
</p>

<p>
This conception of the soul had already been arrived
at in the age of Sargon of Akkad, the earliest to which
at present anything like full contemporaneous records
reach back. But it was an age in which Semitic influence
was already dominant; Sargon was the founder of a
Semitic empire which extended to the shores of the
Mediterranean, and the Sumerian epoch of Babylonian
civilisation had long since passed away. Remote as the
age seems to us of to-day, it was comparatively late in
the history of Chaldæan culture. And deification was
not confined to the person of the king. The high priests
of the Babylonian cities who owned allegiance to him
were similarly deified by their subjects. The daily
offering was made, for instance, to the deified Gudea, the
Sumerian governor of Lagas; he who had ruled on earth,
whether Semite or Sumerian, was adjudged worthy of a
place among the gods of the official creed. King and
noble alike could be raised to the rank of a divinity; and
we even find Gimil-Sin, the king of Ur, erecting a temple
to his own godhead.<note place='foot'>Thureau-Dangin in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xix. p. 186.</note> We are reminded of the shrines
built by the later Pharaohs in honour of their own Kas.
</p>

<p>
The deification of man, and therewith a belief in the
higher destinies of the human soul, can thus be traced
back to an early period of Semitic supremacy in Babylonia.
Unfortunately our evidences for this belief in
the higher destinies of the soul are still but scanty. In
this respect Babylonia offers a striking contrast to Egypt.
There the larger part of the monumental records we
possess are derived from tombs; and Egyptian belief in
regard to the future life is abundantly described not
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
only on the tombstones, but also on the inscribed and
pictured walls of the sepulchre itself. We know almost
more of what the Egyptian thought about the imperishable
part of man and its lot hereafter, than we do about
any other portion of his creed. In Babylonia and Assyria,
on the contrary, there are no tombstones, no pictured
and inscribed tombs. The literature we possess tells us
but little concerning the future life and the beliefs connected
with it. The ritual and the hymns to the gods
are concerned with this life, not with the next, and we
have to grope our way, as it were, through obscure
allusions and ambiguous phrases if we would find in
them any references to the world beyond the grave. To
fall back on mythological poems and heroic epics is
dangerous and misleading. The literary myth will give
us as false an idea of the psychology of a people as it
will of their theology; at most it will express the beliefs
of the individual writer, or enshrine old terms and phrases,
the primitive meaning of which has passed away. To
extract a psychology from literary legends is as difficult
as to extract from them sober history. The poets who
depicted Hades, with its batlike ghosts that fed upon
dust, were using the language of the past rather than of
the age in which they lived. We might as well infer
that the Englishman of the eighteenth century believed
in the Muses whom his poets invoked, as infer from the
language of the poets of Babylonia that the Hades they
described was the Hades of popular belief. The cult of
the kings and nobles is sufficient of itself to prove that
such could not have been the case. And when primitive
conceptions become the commonplaces of literature, their
true signification is lost or blurred.
</p>

<p>
Still less help can be obtained from the magical texts.
And by an unfortunate accident the magical texts constitute
a very undue proportion of those which have
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
hitherto been examined. Until recently we have been
dependent for our knowledge of Babylonian literature on
the relics of the library of Nineveh, the greater part of
which was collected by Assur-bani-pal, and Assur-bani-pal
had a special predilection for charms and exorcisms,
and the pseudo-science of the augur or astrologist. The
world of the magical texts was a world that stood apart
by itself. Magic was only half recognised by the orthodox
faith; its beliefs and practices had come down from
an age when that orthodox faith did not as yet exist,
and its professors were looked upon with suspicion by
the official priesthood. The creed upon which it rested,
therefore, was a creed of the remote past rather than of
the present. Its gods and goddesses were not those of
the State religion except in name; the Istar who patronised
the witch and superintended the mixture of the
poisonous philtre under the cloak of night, was a very
different Istar from the goddess of love and war who
promised help and comfort to Esar-haddon in his need,
and was known to be <q>the mother</q> of mankind. The
State religion, indeed, wisely temporising, had recognised
magic so far as it could be regulated, and placed, as it
were, under the supervision of the priesthood; <q>the
black art</q> was never a heresy to be suppressed by force,
as in ancient Israel; but for all that it stood outside the
official faith, and embodied principles and conceptions
which could be harmonised but imperfectly with the
higher and more enlightened ideas of the historical period.
We may find in the magical texts survivals from the
primeval age of animism, if only we know how to
interpret them rightly, for the religious conceptions of
a later age we shall look in vain. They offer us magic
and not religion, the wizard or witch and not the priest.
</p>

<p>
Such, then, are the reasons why it is impossible for
the present to describe the psychology of the Babylonians
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
with the same accuracy and fulness as that of the
Egyptians, or to trace its history with the same detail.
The materials are wanting, and probably we shall never
have them in the same abundance as in Egypt. But
one thing is clear. Behind the polytheistic view of the
human spirit which prevailed in later times, there lay an
animistic view which closely resembled the primitive
Egyptian doctrine of the Ka. The animistic view passed
away with the rise of Semitic supremacy and the deification
of man, and to discover and define it must be largely
a matter of inference. The doctrine of the double was
superseded by the doctrine of the soul&mdash;that is to say,
of an immortal element which after death was reunited
with the gods. The Zi, with the Lil and the Ekimmu,
had to make way for a higher and purer conception of
the spirit of man. The old names, indeed, still remained,
but more and more emptied of their earlier meaning, or
banished to the outer darkness of the magician and witch.
The water and food that once served to nourish the ghost
in the world below, became offerings to the dead man, and
to the gods under whose protection he continued to be.
<q>All the furniture that befitteth the grave,</q> says an
Assyrian king, <q>the due right of his sovereignty, I displayed
before the sun-god, and beside the father who
begat me I set them in the grave. Gifts unto the
princes, even the spirits of earth, and unto the gods who
inhabit the grave, I then presented.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion</hi>, p. 49.</note> The gifts, it will
be noticed, are not only set by the side of the dead, but
are also presented to the sun-god, who is thus associated
with the deceased king. They are consecrated to the
god of light, who judged mankind, before they can be
claimed by the gods of the grave.
</p>

<p>
But with all this it must be allowed that a great
contrast exists between the Babylonian and the later
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
Egyptian view of the imperishable part of man and its
lot in the other world. And this difference of view
results from a further difference in the view taken of
this present life. To the Egyptian the present life was
but a preparation for the next; not only the spiritual
elements of which he was composed, but, as he hoped,
his body itself would survive beyond the grave. It was
otherwise in Babylonia. No traces of mummification
are to be found there; at most we hear of the corpse
being anointed for death, as it were, with oil or honey;
and cremation, partial or complete, seems to have been
practised. The thoughts of the Babylonian were fixed
rather on this world than on the next; his horizon,
speaking generally, was bounded by death. It was in
this world that he had relations with the gods and
duties towards them, and it was here that he was
punished or rewarded for the deeds committed in the
flesh. The practical character of the Babylonians did
not lend itself to dreams and speculations about the
future; the elaborate map of the other world, which is
drawn in the sacred books of Egypt, would have been
impossible for them. They were too much absorbed in
commerce and trade and the practical pursuit of wealth,
to have leisure for theories that concerned themselves
with a doubtful future and an invisible world. The
shadow of the old religion of Nippur, moreover, with its
underground Hades of darkness and gloom, rested to the
last on the mind of the Babylonian people. The
brighter views which had emanated from Eridu never
succeeded in overcoming it altogether. The gods of light
ruled, indeed, over a world that had once belonged to the
demons of night, but their victory never extended
further. The land of Hades still continued to be a land
of darkness, even though the waters of life gushed up
from below the golden throne of the spirits who dwelt
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
there. We find no conception in Babylonian literature
parallel to the Egyptian fields of Alu, no judgment-hall
of Hades before which the conscience of the dead man
is arraigned. The Babylonian was judged in this life
and not in the next, and the god who judged him was
the sun-god of day, and not the dead sun-god of the
other world.
</p>

<p>
It is usually the fashion to ascribe this concentration
of religion upon the present world, with its repellent
views of Hades and limitation of divine rewards and
punishments to this life, to the inherent peculiarities of
the Semitic mind. But for this there is no justification.
There is nothing in the Semitic mind which would
necessitate such a theological system. It is true that
the sun-god was the central object of the Semitic Babylonian
faith, and that to the nomads of Arabia the
satisfaction of their daily wants was the practical end of
existence. But it is not among the nomads of Arabia
that we find anything corresponding with the Babylonian
idea of Hades and the conceptions associated with it.
The idea was, in fact, of Babylonian origin. If the
Hebrew Sheol resembles the Hades of Babylonia, or the
Hebrew conception of rewards and punishments is like
that of the Assyrians and Babylonians, it is because
the Hebrew beliefs were derived from the civilisation of
the Euphrates. Historically we know that the Israelites
traced their origin from Ur of the Chaldees, and that in
days long before Abraham, Canaan formed part of a
Babylonian empire, and was permeated by Babylonian
culture; on the theological side the derivation of the
Hebrew doctrines is equally clear. The Hebrew Sheol
is too exactly a counterpart of the Babylonian world of
the dead not to have been borrowed from it, like Lilith
and the other spirits whose home it was, and the
theology which taught that the sun-god was the supreme
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
judge of men, punishing in this life their sins or rewarding
their good deeds, was part of the culture which came
from Babylonia to the West. It was no inherent
heritage of Semitic nature, but the product of a civilisation
whose roots went back to a non-Semitic race. The
ruling caste in Egypt were of Semitic extraction, but
their religion contains little or no trace of the ideas
which underlay the Babylonian doctrines of divine retribution
and the future life of the soul.
</p>

<p>
It is to Babylonia, therefore, that we must look for
the origin of those views of the future world and of the
punishment of sin in this life which have left so deep an
impression on the pages of the Old Testament. They
belonged primarily to Babylonia, and were part of the
price which the Semites of the West had to pay for the
inestimable gift of culture that came to them from the
banks of the Euphrates. They were views from which
the Israelite was long in emancipating himself. The
inner history of the Old Testament is, in fact, in large
measure a history of the gradual widening of the
religious consciousness of Israel in regard to them, and
their supersession by a higher and more spiritual form of
faith. The old belief, that misfortune implies sin and
prosperity righteousness, is never, indeed, entirely eradicated,
and Sheol long continues to be a land of shadow
and unsubstantiality, where good and bad share the same
fate, and the things of this life are forgotten; but little
by little newer and purer views make their way into the
religion of the people, and the higher message which
Israel was destined to receive takes the place of the
teaching of the old culture of Babylonia. Babylonia
had done its part; new forces were needed for the
education of mankind.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture III. The Gods Of Babylonia.</head>

<p>
I have already had occasion to refer to one of the gods
of Babylonia, En-lil or El-lil of Nippur.<note place='foot'>By assimilation En-lil became El-lil (and Ul-lil) in one of the
Sumerian dialects (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 37. 21). Hence the Illinos (for which Illillos
must be read) of Damascius.</note> His worship
goes back to the earliest period of Babylonian history;
his sanctuary at Nippur was one of the oldest in the
land. He belongs to the period when the Sumerian
was still supreme, and the name he bore was the
Sumerian title of En-lil, <q>the lord of the ghost-world.</q>
But it was a title only; the <q>lord of the ghosts</q> was
himself a ghost, albeit the chief among them.
</p>

<p>
The fact must be kept carefully in mind. As yet
there was no god in the proper sense of the term. The
superhuman powers that were dreaded and propitiated
were ghosts only, like the ghosts of dead men; and, like
the latter, they were denizens of the grave and the
underground world. It was only at night that they
emerged from their retreat, and terrified the passer-by.
Primitive man fears the dark as much as does the child;
it is then that the powers of evil are active, and spiritual
or supernatural foes lurk behind every corner ready to
injure or destroy him. The ghosts of the night are
accordingly objects of terror, harmful beings from whom
all forms of sickness and insanity are derived.
</p>

<p>
But even these ghosts can be controlled by those who
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
know the magic words or the mystic rites which they
are compelled to obey. Between the ghost and his
victim the sorcerer or medicine-man can interpose, and
by means of his spells force the spirit to quit the body
of the sufferer or enter the body of an enemy. By the
side of the ghost, therefore, stands the sorcerer, who is at
once the master and the minister of the spirit-world.
</p>

<p>
With the progress of civilisation an organised body
of sorcerers necessarily grows up. But an organised
body of sorcerers also implies an organised body of
spirits, and an organised system of controlling them.
The spells and charms which have been handed down
from the past are formed into a system, and the spirits
themselves are classified and defined, while special
functions are assigned to them. The old unorganised
animism passes into an organised shamanism, such as
still prevails among certain Siberian tribes. The
sorcerer is on the high road to becoming a priest.
</p>

<p>
Between the sorcerer and the priest, however, there
is a gulf too wide to be spanned. The religious conceptions
presupposed by them differ in kind as well as in
degree. The nature of the superhuman beings by whom
man is surrounded, and the relations which he bears to
them, are essentially different in the two cases. The
priest may also be a sorcerer, but the sorcerer cannot
be a priest.
</p>

<p>
Can shamanism develop naturally into theism, and
the sorcerer into the priest? Or is there need of foreign
influences and of contact with other ideas and religious
beliefs? I should myself be inclined to adopt the
second alternative. Theism may absorb shamanism, and
the priest throw the ægis of his authority over the
sorcerer, but the natural development of the one into
the other is contrary to the facts of psychology as well
as to those of history. The evolution of a god out of the
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
shaman's ghost may be conceivable, but no evidence for
it exists. The superstitions and beliefs of shamanism
linger, indeed, under a theistic religion, and the polytheism
of Babylonia was no exception to the rule. Up
to the last the magician flourished there, and the spells
he worked were recognised by the religion of the State.
But for all that they stood outside the religion of the
State, harmonising with it just as little as the superstitions
of popular folk-lore harmonise with the
religion we profess. No one would assert that the
Christianity of to-day has grown out of beliefs like that
in the vampire which still holds such sway in some
of the Christian countries of Europe; and there is just
as little reason for asserting that the vampire of the
primitive Sumerian developed into a Babylonian deity.
They represent two diverse currents of belief, which may
for a time run side by side, but never actually coalesce.
</p>

<p>
Babylonian tradition itself bore witness to the fact.
The Chaldæan historian Berossos tells us that the
elements of culture, and therewith of the organised
religion of a later day, were brought to Babylonia from
abroad. Oannes or Ea, the culture-god, had risen
morning by morning out of the waters of the Persian
Gulf, and instructed the savage races of the shore in the
arts of life. It was not from Nippur and the worshippers
of En-lil, but from that mysterious deep which connected
Babylonia with other lands, that its civilisation had come.
It was Ea who had taught men <q>to found the temple</q>
in which the gods of aftertimes were to be adored. The
culture-god of Babylonia was Ea, and the home of Ea
was not in Babylonia, but in the deep.
</p>

<p>
There is no mistaking the significance of the legend.
The culture of Babylonia originated on the seacoast, and
was brought to it across the sea. The elements of
civilisation were due to intercourse with other lands.
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
And this civilisation was associated with a god&mdash;with a
god, too, who represented all the higher aspects of Babylonian
religion, and was regarded as the author of its
sacred books. The impulse which transformed the <q>lord
of the ghost-world</q> into a god, and replaced the sorcerer
by a priest, came not from within, but from without.
</p>

<p>
The impulse went back to that primitive age when
Sumerian supremacy was still unquestioned in the land.
Other races, so the legend averred, were already settled
there, but they were all alike rude and savage <q>as the
beasts of the field.</q> How far distant it may have been
in the night of time we can but dimly conjecture. At
the rate at which the northern coast of the Persian Gulf
is being slowly silted up, it would be at least eight
thousand years ago when the old seaport of Eridu and
the sanctuary of its god Ea stood on the shores of the
sea. But the influence of the Semite was already beginning
to be felt, though indirectly, through maritime
trade.
</p>

<p>
New ideas came from the south. Ea was a god, and
like the gods of the Semitic race he had a wife and son.
While he himself was lord of the deep, Dam-kina, his
wife, was the mistress of the land. His son was Aṡari,
<q>the prince who does good to man,</q><note place='foot'>Aṡari-galu-dugga. We owe the interpretation of the name to the insight
and learning of Fr. Lenormant, from whose untimely death the investigation
of Babylonian religion has suffered grievously.</note> and who, in contradistinction
to the night-demons of Nippur, brought
knowledge and healing to the men whom Ea had created.
The Sumerian might indeed speak of the <q>Zi</q>&mdash;<q>the
spirit</q>&mdash;of Ea, or rather of the deep, but to the Semite
he was a veritable god.
</p>

<p>
At the same time it was the conception only of Ea
and his family which we need trace to a foreign source.
Their names are purely Sumerian, and their origin consequently
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
must be Sumerian too. Doubtless they had
once been mere <foreign rend='italic'>lils</foreign> or ghosts, belonging to the ghost-world
of the god of Nippur, and the spells taught by Ea
to mankind were survivals from the day when the
sorcerer was still his priest.<note place='foot'>Is it possible that the original difference between the Zi and the Lil
was that the one term was used at Eridu the other at Nippur, the meaning
being pretty much the same in both cases? Unfortunately we have
no materials at present for answering the question.</note> But under Semitic influence
the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> had been transformed into a god; the
sacred book took the place of the charm, and the
priest of the magician. The charm and the magician
were still recognised, but it was on the condition that
they adapted themselves to the new ideas. Sumerian
shamanism was overlaid by Semitic polytheism, and in
process of time was absorbed into it.
</p>

<p>
The culture of Eridu spread northward, along with
the religious ideas which formed so integral a part of
it. The worship of Ea was adopted in other cities of
Babylonia, and the god of Babylon was identified with
his son. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> which had been pictured under animal
shape put on human form, and the Sumerian accepted
the conviction of the Semite, that man was made in the
likeness of his god. En-lil of Nippur had to yield to the
influence of the stranger. The antiquity of his worship,
the sanctity of his temple, could not save him from his
fate. He too became a Semitic god; his old name became
an unmeaning title, which survived in literature
but not in the mouths of the people, and he was henceforth
addressed as a Semitic Bilu or Baal. He ceased to
be the chief of the ghosts of night, and was transformed
into the divine <q>Lord</q> of Semitic worship, who, like the
sun, watched over this nether earth. It was a transformation
and not a development.
</p>

<p>
As the Semitic Bel, the god of Nippur continued for
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
long centuries to retain the ancient veneration of the
people. Unlike the Greek Kronos, he was not as yet
dethroned by the younger gods. The position occupied
by the great sanctuary of Nippur and its priesthood long
prevented this. But the destiny of Kronos at last overtook
him. Babylon became the capital of the kingdom,
and its god accordingly claimed precedence over all
others. Merodach of Babylon assumed the title of Bel,
and little by little the old god of Nippur was robbed of
his ancient rank. For the Babylonia of later history
Merodach and not En-lil was the supreme Baal, and
even the legends that had been told of the god of Nippur
were transferred to his younger rival. The memories
that still gathered round Nippur were too deeply tinged
with the colours of a religion that had passed away, and
the beliefs of a darker and less civilised form of faith.
Merodach was the champion of the gods of light, En-lil
had been the lord of the demons of darkness. Theologically
as well as politically it was needful that
Merodach should supplant En-lil.
</p>

<p>
The spread of the worship of Ea, or rather of the
religious conceptions with which it was associated,
brought with it the effacement of Dam-kina. Dam-kina
had once been the earth; just as En-lil at Nippur was
<q>the lord of ghosts,</q> of whom he was himself one, so at
Eridu Dam-kina was the <q>lady of the earth,</q> with which,
as its Zi or <q>spirit,</q> she was herself identified. Sumerian
grammar knew no distinction of gender, and in the
Sumerian family the woman held a foremost place by
the side of the man. It was otherwise among the
Semites. The distinction between the masculine and the
feminine is engrained in the Semitic languages, but the
distinction is attained by forming the feminine out of
the masculine. While a considerable part of Semitic
flexion is the result of vowel changes within the word
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
itself, the feminine is created by attaching an affix to
the masculine form. The masculine presupposes the
feminine, but the feminine is dependent on the masculine.
</p>

<p>
Semitic grammar merely reflects the fundamental
ideas of the Semitic mind. For the Semite the woman
is the lesser man, formed out of him and dependent upon
him. Like the feminine of the noun, she is the colourless
reflection of her husband, though without the reflection
there can be no husband. Wherever the Semitic spirit
has prevailed, the woman has been simply the helpmeet
and shadow of the man; for the orthodox Mohammedan
she hardly possesses a soul. It is only where the
Semitic spirit has been met and checked by the influence
of another race that this is not the case; the high place
retained by the woman in Babylonian society would of
itself have been a proof that Semitic culture had here been
engrafted on that of an older people, even if the monuments
had not revealed to us that such was indeed the
fact.
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising, therefore, that the goddesses or
female spirits of Sumerian faith faded away as the
Semitic element in Babylonian religion became stronger.
At first Semitic influence had done no more than transform
the <q>handmaid of the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign></q> into a goddess; then
the goddesses themselves became like the woman in
Semitic thought, pale and colourless, existing merely for
the sake of the god. Dam-kina, the lady of the earth,
was remembered only by the antiquarian or by the
compiler of a cosmological system. When she became
the wife of Ea her fate was sealed.
</p>

<p>
Her attributes and office, in fact, were transferred to
him. At Eridu he had necessarily been more than the
lord of the deep; he was lord of the city as well. He
had as it were migrated from the deep; he had left his
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
palace of the sea and come to dwell in a sanctuary on
land. The ground on which Eridu stood was the gift of
the sea, the soft silt which the retreating waves of the
Persian Gulf had left behind them. It had once been
part of the domain of Ea, if not Ea himself. Ea accordingly
came to be addressed as the <q>lord of the earth</q> as
well as of the sea, and Eridu, his city, was the <q>city
of the lord of the land.</q> The men who inhabited it
were his creation: he had formed them like a potter out
of the clay, and as the divine <q>potter</q> he was therefore
known unto them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 55. 43, 58. 57; iii. 67. 156.</note> Like the Egyptian Khnum at the
Cataract, he was the first artist in clay, and the models
that he made were the first men.
</p>

<p>
The god of culture was thus also the creator of mankind.
He brought civilisation to them from his home
beneath the waves, but it was because he had already
created them. They were not indeed his children, but
the creation of his hands, for the culture-god was necessarily
an artist, and the men he moulded were the
highest products of his skill. Water and earth had
alike gone to their formation; Ea was master not only
of the sea, but of the land of Eridu as well.
</p>

<p>
The heritage of Dam-kina was thus usurped by the
god whom Semitic influence had given to her as husband.
And therewith the heritage of another goddess of the
Sumerian cult was usurped as well. This was Bau,
whose native home was probably farther to the north,
though she had been as it were domesticated at Eridu in
early days. As Dam-kina was made the wife of Ea, so
Bau was made his mother. For this there was a special
reason. Bau was known as <q>the great mother,</q> from
whom mankind had received the herd and the flock as
well as the crops of the field. She it was who gave
fertility to the soil, and protected those who tilled it.
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
The heifer was her symbol, and she may have been
originally the local spirit of some field in the neighbourhood
of Eridu.<note place='foot'>Her assignment as a wife to the sun-god of Kis or to Nin-ip of Nippur
belongs to a later period; see my Hibbert Lectures, p. 263.</note> But in the days when she is first known
to us by contemporaneous inscriptions, she is already a
goddess, and the Semitic conception of a divine mother
is already attached to her.<note place='foot'>Originally, however, she had been merely a spirit in the form of a
heifer; <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 62. 45, where <q>the ship of Bau</q> is called <q>the
ship of the holy cow.</q> The name is doubtless Sumerian, and it seems to
be the origin of the Baau of Phœnician cosmology, which asserted that
the first men, Æôn and Protogonos, were born of <q>the wind Kolpia and
his wife Baau, which is interpreted Night</q> (Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Prœpar. Evang.</hi>
i. 10). Baau is probably the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Bohu</foreign>.</note> She thus resembles another
goddess, Aruru by name, whom an old cosmological poem
associates with Merodach (or rather Ea) in creating <q>the
seed of man,</q> which springs forth from her bosom like
the reed from the marsh or <q>the wild cow with its
young.</q> In their origin Bau and Aruru are alike but
Dam-kina under other names,&mdash;the earth-spirits of the
old Sumerian religion, who beget or create all living
things. The underground world over which En-lil held
rule was not only the home of the dead, it was also the
place where the seed must be buried before it can spring
up into the green herb. That same ghost-world, consequently,
to which the dead must journey, is also the
source of life. The <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> (or rather the Zi) who inhabits
it is the mother of mankind, even though it is also the
home of the demon who plagues them with disease.
</p>

<p>
Hence it was that when Bau assumed the dress of a
Semitic goddess, she became first the creatress-mother,
and then the mother of the creator. As such, however,
she entered into rivalry with another deity who was similarly
in process of development out of an earlier form.
This was Zi-Kum or Zi-Garum, <q>the spirit of the sky,</q>
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
who is called <q>the mother that has begotten heaven and
earth,</q> and <q>the seeress of the spirit of the earth</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>Ê-kur</foreign>), that is to say, of En-lil.<note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 262, 374, 375. Ê-kur, <q>the house of
the earth,</q> was the name of the temple of En-lil at Nippur. It was the
abode of the <q>lord of the spirits</q> of the earth and the underworld.</note> To the primitive seafarer
of Babylonia the waters of the Persian Gulf seemed
to descend from the vault of heaven which rested upon
them; the streams which intersected the ground were
fed by the rains, and it was therefore natural to suppose
that the sea which blended with the sky was similarly
derived from it. The deep was embosomed in the
heavens, and the spirit of the deep accordingly must
have been begotten by the spirit of the sky.
</p>

<p>
But this spirit of the sky necessarily owned obedience
to the <q>lord of the ghost-world,</q> and the mother of Ea
of Eridu was thus at the same time a ministering handmaid
of En-lil.<note place='foot'>She is called <q>the handmaid of the spirit of E-kura</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi>
ii. 54. 18). The <q>spirit of E-kura</q> is En-lil, whose temple E-kura
was, and consequently the title identifies her with the <foreign rend='italic'>kiel lilla</foreign> or
<q>handmaid of the Lil,</q> who eventually became the Lilith of Jewish
folk-lore.</note> The Zi who was worshipped at Eridu
was also a Lil in the theology of Nippur, and the home
of the Lil was beneath the earth. In this way we must
explain how it is that Zi-Kum, <q>the heaven,</q> is also,
under another aspect, Zi-Kura, <q>the earth,</q> and as such
identical with Dam-kina and Bau.<note place='foot'>Hence in the hymn which describes the oraculur tree of Eridu
(<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 15) the <q>couch</q> of Ea is called <q>the bed of Zi-Kum</q> in
<q>the central place of the earth.</q></note> That she should
have coalesced with Bau rather than with Dam-kina, was
due to the fact that the one was made the mother of Ea,
while the other became his wife. But the lineaments of
the old <q>spirit of the sky</q> were soon obliterated. As
the religion of Babylonia moved further and further away
from the animism of the past, the spirit's existence faded
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
into the background and Bau stepped into its place.
Zi-Kum, <q>the spirit of the sky,</q> ended by becoming a
symbol of that primordial deep from which Ea had derived
his wisdom, and whose waters were above the
visible firmament as well as below it.<note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures on the <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Babylonians</hi>,
pp. 374, 375.</note> Ea, the god of
the mixed Babylonian race, had absorbed the spirits and
ghosts of the Sumerian faith. Their attributes had been
taken from them, and they had been transformed into
goddesses whose sole end was to complete the family of
the culture-god.
</p>

<p>
The old faith was avenged, however, when Babylon
became the political head of Babylonia. Ea was supplanted
by his son, and the honours he had received were
transferred to the younger god. It was his son, too,
under a new and foreign name. Merodach was son of
Ea only because he had been identified with Aṡari, who
was son of Ea in the theology of Eridu. Henceforward
Ea shines merely by reflected light. His wisdom is
handed on to Merodach; even the creation of mankind
is denied to him. It is not Ea, but Merodach, who conquers
the dragon of chaos and introduces law and order
into the world, and it is equally not Ea but Merodach
who is the creator of all visible things. Ea is not robbed,
like Bel of Nippur, of his name and prerogatives, he is
simply effaced.<note place='foot'>Similarly, as I first indicated in my Hibbert Lectures (p. 132), the
first two antediluvian kings of Babylonia given by Berossos do not belong
to the original list, but have been prefixed to it when Babylon became
the leading city of the country, and it was accordingly necessary to make
it the capital of the kingdom from the very beginning of time. It is
worth notice that, just as the first two antediluvian Babylonian kings are
a later addition to the original list, so the first two antediluvian patriarchs
in the Book of Genesis seem to have been added to the original eight.
Adam and Enos are synonyms like Cainan and Cain, for whom Seth, the
Sutu or Bedâwin (Num. xxiv. 17), was substituted. In the Babylonian list,
Amelon or Amilu, <q>man,</q> corresponds with Enos, just as Ammenon
(Ummanu, <q>the craftsman</q>) corresponds with Cainan or Cain, <q>the
smith.</q> For both the Babylonian and the Hebrew, man in the abstract
was followed immediately by civilised man.</note>
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
Midway between Nippur and Eridu stood the city of
Erech. Doubtless it was of Sumerian foundation, like
the other great cities of Babylonia, but as far back as we
can trace its history it is already a seat of Semitic power
and religious cult. Its god was Anu, the sky. It may
be that Anu had been brought from elsewhere, for a
Babylonian inscription of the twelfth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> calls
Dêr rather than Erech his city; but if so, the Semitic
inhabitants of Erech knew nothing of it. For them Anu
was the protecting god of their city, the father of Istar,
whose habitation it was. From the days when Erech
first became a Semitic possession, Anu and Istar had
been worshipped in it side by side. Indeed, it would
seem from the inscription of Lugal-zaggi-ṡi, discovered at
Nippur, that at the remote period to which it belongs
Istar had not yet been associated with Anu in the divine
government of Erech. Lugal-zaggi-ṡi was king of Erech,
and as a consequence <q>priest of Ana,</q> but not of Istar.
So far as the evidence goes at present, it points to the
fact that the divine patron of Erech was Anu, and that
Istar was introduced by the Semites, perhaps from the
town of Dilbat (now Dillem).
</p>

<p>
The god and his name were alike borrowed by the
Semite from his Sumerian predecessor. Ana was the
Sumerian word for <q>sky,</q> and it was doubtless a spirit
of the sky which had been worshipped by the primitive
population of the country. But when the hieroglyphic
pictures were first invented, out of which the cuneiform
characters afterwards developed, the spirit was already
on the way to becoming a god. The eight-rayed star
which denotes Ana in the historical days of Babylonia
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
also denotes a god. He thus became a type of the god
as distinguished from the spirit, and bears witness to the
evolution that was already taking place in the religion of
Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
That there had been spirits of the sky, however, as
well as spirits of the earth, was never forgotten. By the
side of the Anunna-ki or <q>spirits of the earth</q> the later
theology continued to retain a memory of the Igigi or
spirits of heaven.<note place='foot'>The Igigi are represented ideographically by v+ii (the ideograph of
plurality). Perhaps, therefore, they were originally the spirits of the five
planets duplicated according to their appearance in the evening and morning.
If the opinion of Pognon (<hi rend='italic'>L'Inscription de Bavian</hi>, i. p. 25) could
be sustained that the original ideograph was really vii and not v+ii,
we should have a better explanation of them as the seven planets which,
in Chaldæan astronomy, included the sun and moon. The meaning of
the name is unknown. Guyard's supposition, that it is derived from the
Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>agâgu</foreign>, <q>to be angry</q> (not <q>to be strong,</q> as he imagined), is
devoid of probability. In K 2100, col. iv., it is also written Igâgâ, and
explained by <foreign rend='italic'>isartum</foreign>, <q>justice,</q> or <q>straight direction.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi>
ii. 35. 37, the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nun-gal</hi> (pronounced <foreign rend='italic'>Kisagal</foreign>) is called the <foreign rend='italic'>Rîbu</foreign> which
Jensen would connect with the Hebrew Rahab.</note> As En-lil was the chief among the
spirits of the earth, so it is probable that Ana was chief
among the spirits of the sky. But there was not the
same difficulty in accommodating his name and personality
to the new conception of a god that there was in the
case of En-lil. His old Sumerian title brought with it
no associations with animism; there was no need to
change it, and it could therefore, like the name of Ea, be
retained even when the spirit of the sky had become the
god of heaven. From the outset Ana had stood outside
the sphere and dominion of En-lil; he was no ghost of
the underworld to be degraded or renamed.
</p>

<p>
While, therefore, in En-lil of Nippur, even under his
new Semitic form of Bel, the dominant element remained
Sumerian, and in Ea of Eridu the Semitic and Sumerian
elements were mingled together, Ana of Erech was distinctively
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
a Semitic god. It was only by main force,
as it were, that En-lil could be transformed into the
semblance of a Semitic Baal; up to the last he continued
to be lord of the earth rather than of the sky, whose
dwelling-place was below rather than above.<note place='foot'>The divine <q>lord</q> of a place or territory, such as is met with in a
South Arabian or Phœnician inscription, is totally different from the lord
of the ghost-world at Nippur. The one was master of a definite territory
on the surface of the earth, the other was a spirit ruling over other spirits
in an underground world. The two conceptions have nothing in common
with one another.</note> It was
this, perhaps, which facilitated his effacement by Merodach;
the lineaments of a Baal were more easily traceable
in the sun-god of Babylon than in the god of Nippur.
But the sky-god was already a Baal. Between him and
the Semitic Baal-shamain, <q>the lord of heaven,</q> the
distance was but slight, and it was not difficult to clothe
him with the attributes which the Semite ascribed to his
supreme deity. A consciousness of the fact may possibly
be detected in the readiness with which the name and
worship of Anu were accepted in the Semitic West; when
Babylonian culture made its way to Canaan, it was
primarily Anu and the divinities most closely associated
with him&mdash;Istar, Anat, and Dagon&mdash;who found there a
home.
</p>

<p>
Ana, the sky, thus became Anu, the god of a Semitised
Babylonia. But a Semitised Babylonia could not conceive
of a god without a goddess who stood to him in
the relation of the feminine to the masculine gender.
Out of Anu was formed Anat, the feminine counterpart
of the god. The same process at Nippur had created a
Belit or Beltis out of the masculine Bel. The goddesses
owed their existence to a grammatical necessity, and
their unsubstantial and colourless character justified their
origin. They fitly represented the relation in which,
according to Semitic ideas, the woman stood to the man.
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
She was formed out of him in nature as the feminine
was out of the masculine in language, and her very
existence thus depended on her <q>lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
There was, indeed, a goddess, even in Erech, the centre
of Semitic influence, who possessed a very strongly-marked
and independent character of her own. This was
Istar, of whom I shall have to speak at a future time.
But it was just because Istar possessed this independent
character that she could not be the wife of the god of the
sky. The Semitic Baal brooked the presence of no independent
goddess in the divine family; the wife of the
god could not claim rights of her own any more than
the wife of the man. Anu, like Bel and Ea, stood
alone.
</p>

<p>
Erech had been made the capital of a temporarily
united Babylonia at an early age in its Semitic history.
Before the days of Sargon of Akkad, Lugal-zaggi-ṡi&mdash;we
know him only by his Sumerian name&mdash;had made
himself supreme over the smaller States of the country,
and even carried his arms to the distant West. In
an inscription he has left us he boasts that his empire
extended <q>from the lower sea of the Tigris and Euphrates
to the upper sea,</q> presumably the Mediterranean, as he
further defines his power as stretching <q>from the rising
to the setting of the sun.</q> Erech became the capital of
the kingdom, and it was perhaps at this time that it
acquired the name which it bore ever afterwards of <q>the
city</q> <foreign rend='italic'>par excellence</foreign>. Future ages were never allowed
to forget that it had once been the premier city of
Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
Lugal-zaggi-ṡi calls himself <q>the priest of Anu,</q> the
god of the city which he had made the seat of his power.
Anu for awhile was the god of the supreme State in
Babylonia, and therefore supreme god of the whole
country. The king, it is true, had come from the north,
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
and his authority had been given him by Bel of Nippur;
the old sanctuary of Nippur still claimed the first place
in the religion of Northern Babylonia, and the cult of its
god retained its ancient hold on the veneration of the
people. But from henceforward he had to share his
divine honours with another; Bel of Nippur, indeed, conferred
the sovereignty, but the sovereign was priest and
vicegerent of Anu. Bel and Anu were associated together
at the head of the pantheon of Northern Babylonia,
and the position they occupied in it became more
and more unique.
</p>

<p>
So firmly established was it before the reign of Sargon
of Akkad, that even his victories and the empire he
founded failed to give them a colleague in the god of the
new capital city. Bel and Anu remained supreme; the
sun-god of Akkad or Sippar had to content himself with
a subordinate rank. The theological system which put
Bel and Anu at its head was already formed, and the
position assigned to them by the veneration and traditions
of antiquity was too firmly fixed to be shaken.
Northern Babylonia worshipped a dyad in the shape of
two supreme gods.
</p>

<p>
But Babylonia itself was a dual State. It was probably
on this account that Lugal-zaggi-ṡi had fixed his
capital at Erech in the centre of the country, midway
between north and south. And the gods of Northern
Babylonia were not necessarily those of the south. Here
Ea was at the head of the divine host; for the south his
city of Eridu was what Nippur was for the north, and
the same causes which made Bel the dispenser of power
to the northern princes, made Ea the guardian and guide
of the monarchy in the south. For their worshippers
Bel and Ea stood on the same level; the cult of each
alike had descended from a remote antiquity, and their
priests exercised a similar influence and power. As the
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
Babylonians of the north were called the people of Bel
whom Bel could grant to whom he would, so too the
mixed races of the south were the creation of Ea to whom
the god of Eridu had taught the arts of life.
</p>

<p>
The union of north and south consequently brought
with it the formation of a divine triad. Ea joined himself
to Bel and Anu, and the supreme triad of Anu, Bel,
and Ea thus came into existence. The process of formation
was facilitated by the fact that the three gods were
already distinguished from one another in their main
features. Anu was the god of the sky; the earlier
history of Bel had given him naturally the dominion of
the earth; and though, in becoming a Semitic Baal, he had
acquired the attributes of a god of the upper sphere,
these were allowed to fall into the background. Ea was
even easier to deal with; his home was in the deep, and
his rule was accordingly confined to the waters and the
sea. That he had once been a god of the land as well as
of the sea, was dropped out of sight, and in the later
centuries of Babylonia it even began to be forgotten that
he had created man out of the dust of the ground. He
ceased to be the divine potter, and became instead the
god of the waters, who pours out the Tigris and Euphrates
from the vases in his hands. As god of the earth and
the living things upon it, his place was taken by his son.
Aṡari, transformed into the Semitic sun-god Merodach,
became the inheritor of his father's wisdom, and therewith
of his father's power.
</p>

<p>
The formation of the Babylonian triad, and the differentiation
of the divine persons who composed it, must
have been the work of a theological school. It is an
artificial scheme elaborated after the union of the
northern and southern parts of the country. The
universe is divided between the three divine representatives
of Northern, Central, and Southern Chaldæa, whose
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
sanctuaries were the oldest in the land, and whose cult
had been handed down from time immemorial. The
triad once formed became a model after which others
could be created. The other great gods followed the
example that had been set them, and were similarly
resolved into triads. As the orthodox theological system
of Egypt rested on the Ennead, the corresponding Babylonian
system rested on the triad. The principle in
each case was much the same. The Ennead was but a
multiple of the triad, and presupposed the sacred number.
Perhaps we may see in it the result of a contact
between Sumerian modes of thought and the Semitic
conception of the divine family. Where the god had a
wife and a son, the godhead would naturally be regarded
as a trinity.<note place='foot'>The evidence that has since come to light shows that I was wrong in
my Hibbert Lectures (pp. 110, 193) in supposing that the origin of the
triad was purely Sumerian. It was really due to the fusion of the
Sumerian and Semitic elements in the official Babylonian religion. Possibly
the astronomical triad of the sun, moon, and evening star may have
suggested the artificial grouping of the gods of the three great seats of
religious culture, but that was all. The origin of the triad must be sought
in geography, or rather in the fact that Ana, En-lil, and Ea represented
the three chief sanctuaries and centres of religious influence in Babylonia.
I have already pointed out (<hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>, p. 192) that from the fact
that Ana is the first of the triad we may infer that the whole doctrine
originated in the theological school of Erech. Erech, in fact, was the
meeting-place of the Semite and Sumerian, where the Semitic influence
first found itself supreme. The Baal of historical Semitic religion was a
sky-god, despite Robertson Smith's ingenious philological attempts to find
a terrestrial source for him.</note>
</p>

<p>
Under the first and supreme triad came the second
triad of Sin, Samas, and Hadad. Sin, the moon-god,
was adored under many names and in many forms.
But his two chiefest temples were at Ur and at Harran.
Ur, the modern Muqayyar, on the western bank of the
Euphrates, had been dedicated to his service from the
earliest times. The ruins of his temple still rise in huge
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
mounds from the ground. The city stood outside the
limits of the Babylonian plain, in the Semitic territory
of the Arabian desert, and its Semitic population was
therefore probably large. Harran, the other seat of the
moon-god, was equally beyond the limits of Babylonia,
and guarded the high road of commerce and war that
led from the East to the West. But the name Harran,
<q>the road,</q> is Babylonian, and, like its temple and god,
the city doubtless owed its origin to Babylonian colonists.
They probably came from Ur.
</p>

<p>
The moon-god of Ur is called the son of En-lil of
Nippur, and it may be therefore that Nippur was the
mother-city of Ur. But it must be remembered that
whereas Ur was built on the desert plateau of Arabia,
Nippur stood among the marshes of the Babylonian
plain. Its sanctuary could not have been founded
before the marshes had been, at all events, partially
drained, and the inundating rivers been regulated by
dykes and canals. A settlement on the higher and drier
ground would seem more naturally to precede one in the
pestiferous swamps below it, and the fact that Ur was
the neighbour of Eridu seems to point to its early
foundation and connection with the old seaport of the
country. At the same time the worship of the moon-god
is associated with the Semites of Arabia and the
west rather than with Eridu, whose god revealed himself
to mankind by day and not in the shades of night.<note place='foot'>Cf. Hommel, <hi rend='italic'>Aufsätze und Abhandlungen</hi>, ii. pp. 149-165. Hommel
has proved, with the help of the Minæan inscriptions, that primitive
Semitic religion consisted of moon and star worship, the moon-god Athtar
and an <q>angel</q> god standing at the head of the pantheon, while the
sun-goddess was attached to them as daughter or wife. The supreme
Baal of the Western Semites was thus originally the moon-god, a fact
that throws light on his cult at Ur and Harran, which lay outside Babylonia
proper, and were inhabited by a large West Semitic population.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was right and fitting, however, that the moon-god
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
should be <q>the firstborn</q> of the god of Nippur. The
realm of En-lil was in the underground world of darkness,
and the spirits over whom he had ruled plied their
work at night. Naturally, therefore, it was from him
and the dark world which originally belonged to him
that the moon-god proceeded. It may be that Sin
had once been one of the spirits in the domain of En-lil,
a mere ghost whom the sorcerer could charm. But with
his elevation to the rank of a god his attributes and
character grew fixed and defined. In the ancient hymns
addressed to him he is far more than a mere god of the
moon. His worshipper at Ur, where he was known
under the name of Nannar, addressed him as not only
<q>lord of the moon,</q> but also <q>prince of the gods,</q>
<q>the begetter of gods and men.</q> It is thus that we
read in an old bilingual hymn&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Father, long-suffering and full of forgiveness, whose hand upholds the life of all mankind,</q></l>
<l>Lord, thy divinity, like the far-off heaven, fills the wide sea with fear ...</l>
<l>Firstborn, omnipotent, whose heart is immensity, and there is none who shall discern it ...</l>
<l>Lord, the ordainer of the laws of heaven and earth, whose command may not be [broken] ...</l>
<l>In heaven, who is supreme? Thou alone, thou art supreme!</l>
<l>On earth, who is supreme? Thou alone, thou art supreme!</l>
<l>As for thee, thy will is made known in heaven, and the angels bow their faces.</l>
<l>As for thee, thy will is made known on earth, and the spirits below kiss the ground.</l>
<l>As for thee, thy will is blown on high like the wind; the stall and the fold are quickened.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>As for thee, thy will is done on the earth, and the herb grows green.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such language is fitter for a supreme Baal than for a
local moon-god; and, in fact, it was as a supreme Baal
rather than as a local moon-god that Nannar was adored
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
at Ur. His connection with the moon was, as it were,
an accident; the essential point about him was that he
was the guardian god of the city. Its temple had been
dedicated to him in prehistoric days, and with the rise
of Semitic influence all the attributes associated with
a Semitic Baal gathered round his person. He remained,
it is true, a moon-god, but he was also more than a
moon-god. He was the chief deity of a city whose
kings had ruled throughout Babylonia, and carried their
arms to the distant West.
</p>

<p>
His transformation into a supreme Baal was doubtless
assisted by the important place filled by the moon in
early Babylonian culture. The moon was the measurer
of time; the first calendar was a lunar one, and time
was marked by the movements of the moon and not by
those of the sun. It was on this account that the
moon-god was called En-zu, <q>the lord of knowledge,</q>
by the Sumerians; through him they learned how
to regulate the year and the festivals of the gods.
Astronomy had been cultivated in Babylonia from the
beginning of its history, and for a nation of astronomers
the moon was naturally an object of veneration and
regard. It was the symbol of law and order as well as
of the light that illuminated the darkness of the night.
</p>

<p>
But we must notice that it was only at Ur and
Harran that Sin or Nannar was thus elevated to the
rank of a supreme Baal. The official theology refused
to include him among the three chief gods of the land.
He was, in fact, as Professor Hommel has shown, rather
the Baal of the Semitics of Arabia and the West than
of the Babylonians themselves, and the place occupied
by his cult at Ur proves how completely this city lay
outside the limits of the true Babylonia, and was peopled
by an Arabian population.
</p>

<p>
The sun-god was born of the moon. The lunar year
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
preceded the solar, and to the primitive Babylonian the
moon was a more important agent of culture even than
the sun. Moreover, the sun seemed to rise from that
world of night over which the moon held sway; the day
was begotten by the night, and was accordingly reckoned
from evening to evening. It is not until we come to
the later age of Babylonian history that we find the old
system making way for a new one, in which the day
begins at midnight; and the 1st chapter of Genesis, with
its <q>evening and morning,</q> perpetuates the ancient
system of Babylonian astronomy.
</p>

<p>
The sun-god was known under many names, and, like
the moon-god, was worshipped in many of the Babylonian
cities. But just as in historical times there were
two chief seats of the worship of the moon-god,&mdash;at Ur
in the south, and at Harran in the north,&mdash;so too there
were two chief seats of the worship of the sun-god, one
in Southern and the other in Northern Babylonia. The
southern seat was Larsa, the northern Zimbir or Sippara
on the borders of Mesopotamia. And as the moon-god
of Ur was older than the moon-god of Harran, so there
are reasons for thinking that the sun-god of Larsa was
older than his rival at Sippara. Babylonian culture
moved from south to north.
</p>

<p>
Both at Larsa and at Sippara the temple of the sun-god
was called Ê-Babbara,&mdash;Bit-Uri in Semitic,&mdash;<q>the
house of light.</q> At Sippara it had been founded or
restored by Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon of Akkad, in
the early days of Semitic supremacy. The Sumerian
Utu had already become the Semitic Samas, and clothed
himself in the attributes of a Semitic Bel. And therewith
he had necessarily taken to himself a wife. This
was Â, who, in becoming the consort of a Semitic Baal,
was compelled to change her sex. For the Sumerian Â
was a male god, a local sun-god, in fact, whom Professor
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
Jastrow suggests may originally have been the sun-god
of one of the separate villages out of the amalgamation
of which the city of Sippara arose.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>, p. 74.</note> Sumerian grammar,
however, did not recognise gender; so far as outward
form was concerned, the same word, as in English, might
be indifferently masculine or feminine, and there was
therefore nothing in the name of Â itself which would
forbid the foreigner from dealing with it as he would.
Samas of Sippara needed a wife, and Â, despite her male
origin, was accordingly given to him. But the gift
was fatal to Â herself. She lost her individuality, and
became the mere double of her husband. Samas absorbed
her attributes and worship, and gradually she sinks
out of sight, or survives only in the works of theological
antiquarians or in the literature of the past.<note place='foot'>The name of the Edomite king Â-rammu in the time of Sennacherib
shows that the name and worship of Â had been carried to the West.
Compare also the name of Ehud (Judg. iii. 15). Â seems to have been a
title signifying <q>the father,</q> the actual Sumerian name of the deity
being Sirrigam (see my Hibbert Lectures, p. 178).</note>
</p>

<p>
Hadad, the third in the second triad of the
Babylonian State religion, had no city which he could
peculiarly call his own. He had developed out of the
Sumerian spirits of the storm, who revealed themselves
in the raging wind or the tempest of rain. More than
one elemental spirit or demon had gone to his making
and there was consequently no single sanctuary in which
his cult had been handed down from the beginning of
time. Wherever the storm raged or the deluge
descended, Hadad was to be found, like the spirits from
whom he had descended.
</p>

<p>
Under the influence of Semitic ideas he gradually
became the god of the air. His old character, indeed
never deserted him; up to the last he remained the
divine power, who not only gave the fertilising rain in
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
the thunder, and he carried the forked lightning in his
hand. God of the air though he was, he continued to
be the storm-god as well.
</p>

<p>
The god of the storm was naturally the god of the
mountains. When the armies of Babylonia first made
their way to the West, they found themselves in a land
of mountains, where the storm burst suddenly upon
them, and the streams flowed swollen with rain into the
sea. Here, therefore, in the land of the Amorites the
Babylonian seemed to have discovered the true home of
the god he worshipped. Hadad was an Amorite rather
than a Babylonian, and the title, accordingly, by which
he was most frequently addressed in early days was
that of <q>the Amorite god.</q>
</p>

<p>
The title is Sumerian in origin, and must therefore
have been given while as yet the Sumerian was dominant.
This raises the question whether the name by which the
god was subsequently known in Semitic Babylonia was
not rather of Amorite than of Babylonian derivation.
And there is much in favour of the view. Hadad, or
Rimmon as he was also termed, was in a special way
the god of Syria. His worship was spread along the
whole length of the Syrian seaboard, and we find him
holding there the rank of a supreme Baal. It is not as
the god of storms, but as the sun-god himself, that he
was adored in Syria, and his very name there became
synonymous with deity. That the Semitised Sumerian
of Babylonia should have identified the supreme god of
a land of mountains and storms with his own storm-god,
we can understand; that the Syrian should have transferred
the name of a Babylonian god of storms to his
own chief Baal, would be difficult to explain. However
this may be, the person of Hadad is peculiarly Semitic.
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
The features which he inherited from his Sumerian
ancestry were obscured or dropped, and he became in
all respects a Semitic god. We need not be surprised,
therefore, at finding that he was a special favourite in
Assyria. Assur-nazir-pal calls him <q>the mightiest of
the gods,</q> and the Assyrian troops in their onset are
likened to him.<note place='foot'>For the absorption by Hadad of the Sumerian god of the air, Meri or
Mermer, the divine patron of the city of Muru, my Hibbert Lectures, p.
202 sqq., may be consulted. Gubára, <q>the lady of the plain,</q> was
apparently originally the wife of Meri; when Meri passed into Hadad,
Gubára necessarily became the wife of the latter, <q>the lord of the
mountain,</q> as he was called. As Hadad was already provided with a
wife, Sala, the next step was to identify Sala and Gubára. Properly
speaking, Gubára represented the Canaanitish goddess Ashêrah, Asirtum
in Babylonian: see Reisner, <q>Sumerisch-babylonische Hymnen nach
Thontafeln griechischer Zeit,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus den orientalischen
Sammlungen zu Berlin</hi>, x. p. 139, where the Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>Martue mulu
kharsagga-ga Gubarra gasan gu-edin</foreign> is translated <foreign rend='italic'>Amurru bel sadî
Asratum belit tseri</foreign>, <q>the Amorite god (Hadad), the lord of the mountain;
Asratum (Ashêrah), the lady of the plain.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the triad was not confined to the
more prominent gods. It was extended to others also
who occupied a lower rank in the divine hierarchy or
in the public cult. Thus Samas helps to form the
subordinate triad of Samas, Malik, and Bunênê, in
which the local sun-gods, Malik and Bunênê, are
distinguished from Samas of Sippara, and Bunênê is
transformed into a female divinity, the consort of Malik.
But in all cases the principle is the same. The Semitic
conception of the divine family, husband, wife, and son,
is combined with the older ideas of genderless Sumerian,
which placed the goddess on the same level as the god,
and the result is a triad in which the Sumerian element
has so far prevailed as to exclude the mother and son,
and leave three gods of equal power and rank.<note place='foot'>The triad of Athtar, the moon-god and the <q>angel-messenger,</q>
which Hommel has shown to be presupposed in the South Arabian
inscriptions, was due to the influence of Babylonian culture. This is
made clear by the Babylonian name of the moon-god, Sin, in the
inscriptions of Hadhramaut, and of Aubây, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Nebo, in those of
Katabân. On the other hand, the addition of the sun-goddess to the
triad is purely Semitic.</note>
</p>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<p>
The Babylonian triad is thus in no way a trinity.
The divine persons who compose it are coequal and
independent one of the other, the sphere of each being
limited by that of the other. But they divide the whole
universe between them, or at all events that part of the
universe over which their attributes and authority
extend. They are partners with carefully defined
powers, arranged in groups of three. None of them is
a supreme Baal dominant over the other two. Nor,
indeed, are they Baalim at all in the strict sense of the
word. For the Semitic Baalim admitted of no such
grouping; each was supreme god in his own locality,
where his powers were neither shared nor limited by
another god. A triad like that of Anu, Bel, and Ea
could not exist where each local Baal claimed all the
attributes that were divided between the three Babylonian
deities, and its existence in Babylonia is one of many
proofs that, though Babylonian religion in its later form
was moulded by Semitic hands, the elements that
composed it had come in large measure from an older
faith.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture IV. The Sun-God And Istar.</head>

<p>
It is thus that Nebuchadrezzar addresses his god in the
plenitude of his glory and power&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>To Merodach, my lord, I prayed; I began to him my
petition; the word of my heart sought him, and I said:
<q>O prince that art from everlasting, lord of all that
exists, for the king whom thou lovest, whom thou
callest by name, as it seems good unto thee thou guidest
his name aright, thou watchest over him in the path of
righteousness! I, the prince who obeys thee, am the
work of thy hands; thou hast created me, and hast
intrusted to me the sovereignty over multitudes of men,
according to thy goodness, O lord, which thou hast made
to pass over them all. Let me love thy supreme
lordship, let the fear of thy divinity exist in my heart,
and give what seemeth good unto thee, since thou
maintainest my life.</q> Then he, the firstborn, the
glorious, the leader of the gods, Merodach the prince,
heard my prayer and accepted my petition.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>East India House Inscription</hi>, i. 52-ii. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>To Merodach, my lord, I prayed, and lifted up my
hand: <q>O Merodach, (my) lord, the wise one of the gods,
the mighty prince, thou didst create me and hast
intrusted to me the dominion over multitudes of men;
as my own dear life do I love the height of thy court;
among all mankind have I not built a city of the earth
fairer than thy city of Babylon. As I have loved the
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
fear of thy divinity and have sought after thy lordship,
accept the lifting up of my hands, hearken to my
petition, for I the king am the adorner (of the shrine)
who rejoices thy heart, an instructed ruler, the adorner
of all thy fortresses.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>East India House Inscription</hi>, ix. 45-x. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
The god before whom the great Babylonian conqueror
thus humbles himself in passionate devotion, was the
divine guardian and lord of his capital city. Ever since
the days when Babylon had been but one of the many
villages of Babylonia, Merodach had been its presiding
god. It was to him that Ê-Saggil, its sanctuary, was
dedicated, and from him and his priesthood the kings of
Babylon derived their right to rule. Merodach had
given them their supremacy, first in Babylonia and then
throughout Western Asia, and the supremacy he bestowed
upon them was reflected upon himself. The god followed
the fortunes of his city, because through him his city had
risen to power; and he became Bel, <q>the lord,</q> not for
the inhabitant of Babylon only, but for all the civilised
world. Like Amon of Thebes, Bel-Merodach of Babylon
supplanted the older gods of the country because the
city wherein he was worshipped supplanted the earlier
seats of Babylonian power.
</p>

<p>
Like Amon of Thebes, moreover, Merodach of Babylon
owed much to his solar character. Youngest of the
gods though he might be, he was yet a form of the sun-god,<note place='foot'>The solar character of Merodach was first pointed out by myself
(<hi rend='italic'>Trans. SBA.</hi> (1873) ii. p. 246), and the proofs of it were given in my
Hibbert Lectures, p. 100 sqq. The Sumerian poem in which the creation
is ascribed to Ea makes Ê-Saggil originally the name of the temple of Ea
at Eridu, from whence it must have been transferred to Babylon when Ea
was supplanted by Merodach. From the list of Babylonian kings in
which their names are explained, we may perhaps infer that the proper
title of the temple at Babylon was E(s)-Guzi. Guzi had the same
meaning in Sumerian as Ê-Saggil, <q>the house of the high head</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 30. 4, 26. 58).</note>
and as such a representative and impersonation
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
of the supreme Baal. However much his solar features
were overshadowed by other attributes in later days,
they were never wholly obscured, and his solar origin
was remembered to the last. It was never forgotten
that before he became the supreme Bel or <q>lord</q> of
Babylonian theology he had been merely a local sun-god,
like Utu of Larsa or Samas of Sippara.
</p>

<p>
We can even trace his cult to Sumerian days. A
punning etymology, proposed for his name in an age
when the true origin of it had been lost, made him the
<foreign rend='italic'>amar-utuki</foreign> or <q>heifer of the goblin</q>; and the fact that
the sun-god was known to have once been an <foreign rend='italic'>utuk</foreign> or
<q>goblin</q> seemed to lend countenance to it. But when
we first catch glimpses of his worship, he has already
ceased to belong to the goblins of the night. He has
been identified with Asari the son of Ea of Eridu, and
has thus became the messenger and interpreter of the
culture-god.
</p>

<p>
In the language of Sumer, Asari signified <q>the strong
one</q> or <q>prince.</q><note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>Ati</hi>, <q>prince,</q> the title of Osiris.</note> His name was expressed by two
ideographs which denoted <q>place</q> and <q>eye,</q> and had
precisely the same meaning and form as the two which
expressed the name of the Egyptian Osiris.<note place='foot'>This was first pointed out by Ball, <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Archæology</hi>, xii. 8, pp. 401, 402.</note> Between
the Sumerian Asari and the Egyptian Osiris, therefore, it
seems probable that there was a connection. And to
my mind the probability is raised to practical certainty
by the fact that the character and attributes of both
Asari and Osiris were the same. Osiris was Un-nefer,
<q>the good being,</q> whose life was spent in benefiting and
civilising mankind; Asari also was <q>the good heifer</q>
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
(<foreign rend='italic'>amar-dugga</foreign>), and his common title was that of <q>the
prince who does good to men</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Aṡari-galu-dugga</foreign>). He
it was who conveyed to men the teaching of Ea, who
healed their diseases by means of his father's spells, and
who <q>raised the dead to life.</q> Asari and Osiris are not
only the same in name and pictorial representation, they
play the same part in the history of religion and culture.
</p>

<p>
But there was one important difference between them.
Osiris was a dead god, whose kingdom was in the other
world; Asari brought help to the living, whom he restored
from sickness and delivered from death. Even in Egypt,
however, it was remembered that Osiris had been a god
of the living before he was god of the dead. Tradition
told how he had instructed men in the arts of life, and
done for primeval Egypt what Ea and Asari had done
for Chaldæa. The difference between him and Asari is a
difference that runs through the whole of Egyptian and
Babylonian theology. The Egyptian of the historical
period fixed his eyes on the future life, and the god he
worshipped accordingly was the god who judged and
saved him in the other world; the religion of the Babylonian
was confined to this world, and it was in this
world only that he was judged by the sun-god, and
received his sentence of reward or punishment. The
mummified sun-god did not exist for the Babylonians,
for the practice of mummification was unknown among
them.
</p>

<p>
It is possible that Aṡari, <q>the prince who does good to
men,</q> had been originally a title of Ea. If so, the title
and the god had been separated from one another at an
early epoch, and the title had become itself a god who
owned Ea as his father. This relationship between Ea
and his son betrays Semitic&mdash;or at all events foreign&mdash;influence.
The ghosts and spirits of primitive Sumerian
belief were not bound together by any such family ties;
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
the demons of the night had little in common with the
men they terrified and plagued. Asari had once been
conceived of as a ram, Ea as an antelope; and between
the ram and the antelope no genetic relationship was
possible. They might be united together like the composite
creatures which had come down to the Babylonians
from the old Sumerian days, but there could be no birth
of one from the other. Birth characterises the present
creation in which like springs from like; it was only in
the time of chaos that unlike forms could be mingled
together in disorderly confusion.
</p>

<p>
That Asari was a sun-god follows from his identification
with Merodach. Here and here only could have
been the link which bound the two deities together.<note place='foot'>We may compare the statement in a hymn (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 50. i. 5) that the
sun-god <q>rises from the Du-azagga, the place of destinies,</q> where the
Assyrian translation has <q>mountain of destinies.</q> The Du-azagga was
on the horizon of Ea's domain, the deep.</note>
But in passing into Merodach he lost his own personality.
Henceforth the son of Ea and the god of
Babylon are one and the same.
</p>

<p>
It was but gradually that he attained his high position
in the Babylonian pantheon. Ea and Asari were gods of
the south; Babylon lay in the northern half of the
country. There must therefore have been some special
reason for the close connection that grew up between
them. I know of no other that would account for it
except the one I gave many years ago&mdash;that Babylon
was a colony from Eridu. In this case we could understand
why its local deity should have been a son of Ea,
and how accordingly it became possible to identify him
with that particular son of the god of Eridu whose
attributes resembled his own.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult at present to trace the history of
Merodach beyond the age of the dynasty of Khammurabi.
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
It was then that Babylon became an imperial city, and
the power of its god grew with the power of its rulers.
The dynasty was Semitic, though of foreign origin; and
we may gather from the names of the first two kings
that the ancestral god of the family had been Ṡamu<note place='foot'>More commonly written Ṡumu.</note> or
Shem. But with the possession of Babylon the manners
and religion of Babylonia were adopted; the fourth king
of the dynasty bears a Babylonian name,<note place='foot'>Abil-Sin, <q>the son of the moon-god,</q> the god of the city of Ur, to
which the preceding dynasty had belonged.</note> and his grandson
ascribes his victories to the god of Babylon.
</p>

<p>
Merodach is invested by Khammurabi with all the
attributes of a supreme Semitic Baal. His solar character
falls into the background; he becomes the lord of gods
and men, who delivers the weak and punishes the proud.
The office of judge, which belonged to him as the sun-god,
is amplified; the wisdom he had derived from Ea is made
part of his original nature; his quality of mercy is
insisted on again and again. Like the Semitic Baal, he
is the father of his people, the mighty king who rules
the world and occupies the foremost place in the council
of the gods. Already the son of Khammurabi declares
that the older Bel of Nippur had transferred to Merodach
the sovereignty of the civilised world; the power of
Nippur and its priesthood had passed to Babylon, and its
god had to make way for a younger rival. As long as
Babylon remained the capital of the kingdom, the Bel or
<q>lord</q> of Babylonia was Merodach. The god followed
the fortunes of his State.
</p>

<p>
The sanctity that had lingered for so many centuries
around the temple of Nippur now passed to Ê-Saggil, the
temple of Merodach. The priests of Merodach inherited
the rights and functions of the priests of En-lil. From
henceforth it was Merodach and his priests who could
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
make and unmake kings; it was only the prince who
had <q>taken the hand of Bel</q> of Babylon, and thereby
been adopted as his son, that could claim legitimate rule.
The descendants of the conquerors who had carried
Babylonian culture to the lands of the West, derived their
title to dominion not from Nippur, but from Babylon,
and it was forgotten that the title had ever had any
other source. The lordship of the world had indeed
been transferred to a new god and a new city; Zeus had
supplanted his father Kronos.
</p>

<p>
A sort of pæan in praise of Merodach, which is
supposed to form part of the Epic of the Creation, describes
how the god of Babylon received the names, and
therewith the attributes and powers, of the older deities.
In the great assembly of the gods he was greeted as
their Zi or <q>Life,</q><note place='foot'>Though Zi is used here in its Semitic sense of <q>life</q> in the abstract,
the position given to it as the first of the divine names and qualities
bestowed on Merodach is significant. Before he can be identified with
any of the gods of the official pantheon, he must become a Zi or <q>spirit,</q>
or more strictly <q><emph>the</emph> spirit</q> of heaven. Similarly the divine essence of
Ea is still called his Zi or <q>spirit,</q> a survival from a time when Ea was
not yet a god.</note> then as Ea under his name of <q>god
of divine life,</q> then as Hadad or the god of <q>the good
wind,</q><note place='foot'>It is probable that the word <q>wind</q> here, though its original sense
was obscured or forgotten, goes back to an age when it signified the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> of
which in the lexical tablets it is given as an equivalent.</note> and finally as Sin with <q>the divine crown,</q> in
whose name he became <q>the merciful one who brings
back the dead to life.</q> The ceremony was not concluded
until he had received all <q>the fifty names of the great
gods,</q> whose virtues and essence had thus, as it were,
passed into himself. Not only was he their heir, he also
absorbed their whole being, and so became one with his
father, who is made to say: <q>He is become even as
myself, for Ea is (now) his name.</q>
</p>

<p>
In these words we are brought very near to the
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
Egyptian doctrine which transmuted one god into another,
and saw in them only so many forms of the same
divinity. But the stage of pantheism was never reached
in Babylonia. The Semitic element in Babylonian
religion was too strong to admit of it; the attributes and
character of each deity were too clearly cut and defined,
and the Semitic mind was incapable of transforming the
human figures of the gods into nebulous abstractions.
The god was too much of a man, moving in too well
marked a sphere, to be resolved into a mere form or
manifestation. Merodach might receive from the other
gods their attributes and the power to exercise them, but
it was delegation and not absorption. The other gods
still retained the attributes that belonged to them, and
the right to use them if they would. Merodach was
their vicegerent and successor rather than themselves
under another form.
</p>

<p>
Hence it is that the human element in the Babylonian
god predominated over the abstract and divine. His
solar attributes fell into the background, and he became
more and more the representative of a human king who
rules his people justly, and whose orders all are bound
to obey. He became, in fact, a Semitic Baal, made
in human form, and consequently conceived of as an
exaggerated or superhuman man. The other gods are
his subjects, not forms under which he can reveal himself;
they retain their individualities, and constitute his
court. There is no nebulosity, no pantheism, in the
religion of Semitic Babylonia; the formless divinity and
the animal worship of Egypt are alike unknown to it.
As is the man, so is the god, for the one has been made
in the likeness of the other.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the solar origin of Merodach left its
impress upon the theology of the State. It had much to
do with that process of identifying one god with another,
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
which, as we have seen, tended to approximate the
doctrines of Babylonia to those of Egypt. Though the
individual gods were distinguished and marked off from
one another like individual men, it was yet possible to
get as it were behind the individual traits, and find in
certain of them a common element in which their
individual peculiarities were lost. The name, so the
Babylonian believed, was the essence of the person or
thing to which it was attached; that which had no name
did not exist, and its existence commenced only when it
received its name. A nameless god could not exist any
more than a nameless man, and a knowledge of his name
brought with it a knowledge of his real nature and
powers. But a name was transferable; it could be
taken from one object and given to another, and therewith
the essential characteristics which had belonged to
the first would become the property of the other.
</p>

<p>
When the name was changed, the person or thing was
changed along with it. To give Merodach another
name, therefore, was equivalent to changing his essential
characteristics, and endowing him with the nature and
properties of another god. The solar character which
belonged to him primitively gave the first impulse to
this transference and change of name. There were
other solar deities in Babylonia, with distinct personalities
of their own, for they were each called by an
individual name. But the sun which they typified and
represented was the same everywhere, and the attributes
of the solar divinity differed but little in the various
States of Semitic Babylonia. It was easy, therefore, to
assign to the one the name of another, and the assignment
brought with it a change of personality. With
the name came the personality of the god to whom it
originally belonged, and who now, as it were, lost his
individual existence. It passed into the person of the
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
other deity; the two gods were identified together; but
it was not by the absorption of the one into the other
but by the loss of individual existence on the part of
one of them. It was no resolution of two independent
beings into a common form, but rather the substitution
of one individual for another.
</p>

<p>
This process of assimilation was assisted by the Babylonian
conception of the goddess. By the side of the
god, the goddess was little more than a colourless
abstraction which owed its origin to the necessities of
grammar. The individual element was absent; all that
gave form and substance to the goddess was the particular
name she happened to bear. Without the name
she had no existence, and the name itself was but an
epithet which could be interchanged with another
epithet at the will of the worshipper. The goddesses of
Babylonia were thus like the colours of a kaleidoscope,
constantly shifting and passing one into another. As
long as the name existed, indeed, there was an individuality
attached to it; but with the change of name the
individuality changed too. The individuality depended
more on the name in the case of the goddess than in the
case of the god; for the goddess possessed nothing but
the name which she could call her own, while the god
was conceived of as a human lord and master with
definite powers and attributes. There was, it is true,
one goddess, Istar, who resembled the god in this respect;
but it was just the goddess Istar who retained her
independent personality with as much tenacity as the
gods.
</p>

<p>
When once the various sun-gods of Babylonia had
been assimilated, or identified, one with the other, it was
not difficult to extend the process yet further. As the
city of Merodach increased in power, lording it over the
other States of the country, and giving to their inhabitants
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
its own name, so Merodach himself took precedence
over the older gods of Babylonia, and claimed the
authority and the attributes which had belonged to
them. Their names, and therewith their powers, were
transferred to him; the supremacy of En-lil, the wisdom
of Ea, the glory of Anu, alike became his. The <q>tablets
of destiny,</q> which conferred on their possessor the
government of the visible world, were taken from the
older Bel and given to his younger rival; the wisdom
of which Merodach had once been the interpreter now
became his own; and, like Anu, his rule extended to the
farthest regions of the sky. But in thus taking the
place of the great gods of earth and heaven, Merodach
was at the same time the inheritor and owner of their
names. If the tablets of destiny had passed into his
possession, it was because he had assumed along with
them the name of Bel; if Ea and Anu had yielded to
him their ancient prerogatives, it was because he had
himself been transformed into the Ea and Anu of the
new official theology. The Babylonian hymn in honour
of Merodach, when it declares that the fifty names of
the great gods had been conferred upon him, only
expresses in another form the conviction that he had
entered into the heritage of the older gods.
</p>

<p>
As time went on, and Babylon continued to be the
sovereign city of the kingdom, the position of its god
became at once more exalted and more secure. The
solar features in his character passed out of sight; he
was not only the giver of the empire of the world to his
adopted son and vicegerent, the king of Babylon, he was
also the divine counterpart and representative of the
king in heaven. The god had made man in his own
image, and he was now transformed into the likeness
of men. Two ideas, consequently, struggled for the
mastery in Babylonian religion&mdash;the anthropomorphic
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
conception of the deity, and the belief in his identification
with other gods; and the result was an amalgamation
of the two. Merodach was the divine man, freed
from the limitations of our mortal existence, and therefore
able not only to rule over the other gods, but also,
like the magician, to make their natures his own. The
other gods continued to exist indeed, but it was as his
subjects who had yielded up to him their powers, and of
whom, accordingly, he could dispose as seemed to him
good. Originally the first among his peers, he ended&mdash;at
least in the belief of the native of Babylon&mdash;in
becoming supreme over them, and absorbing into himself
all the attributes and prerogatives of divinity.
</p>

<p>
It was not, however, till the closing days of Babylonian
independence that an attempt was made to give
outward and visible expression to the fact. Nabonidos,
the last king of Babylon and the nominee of its priesthood,
took the images of the gods from their ancient
shrines and carried them to Babylon. There, in the
temple of Merodach, they formed as it were his court,
bowing in reverence before him, when, on the festival of
the New Year, he announced the destinies of the future.
It was an effort to centralise the religion of the country,
and give public proof of the supremacy of the god of
Babylon. Like the parallel endeavour of Hezekiah in
Judah, the attempt of Nabonidos naturally aroused the
hostility of the local priesthoods; and, when Cyrus
invaded the country, there was already a party in it
ready to welcome him as a deliverer, and to maintain
that Merodach himself had been angered by the sacrilegious
king. The attempt, indeed, came too late, and
Nabonidos was too superstitious and full of respect for
the older sanctuaries and gods of Babylonia to carry it
out in other than a half-hearted way. But it indicated
the tendency of religious thought, and the direction in
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
which the official worship of Merodach was irresistibly
bearing its adherents. Merodach, like his city, was
supreme, and the older gods were surely passing away.
</p>

<p>
The tendency was checked, however, by the long continuity
of Babylonian history. Babylonian records
went back far beyond the days when Babylon had
become the capital of the kingdom. It was remembered
that there had been other centres of power, in ages when
as yet Babylon was but an obscure village. It was
never forgotten that the god of Nippur had once made
and unmade kings, that Akkad had been the seat of an
empire, or that Ur had preceded Babylon as the capital
of the ruling dynasty. Babylonian history did not
begin with the rise of Babylon to power, much as the
priests of Babylon wished to make it do so; and the
chronological schemes which made a native of Babylon
the first ruler of mankind, or traced to Babylon the first
observations of astronomy, were but fictions which a
little acquaintance with history could easily refute.
The earlier cities of the land were proud of their
traditions and their temples, and were not inclined to
give them up in favour of the <foreign rend='italic'>parvenu</foreign> city of Merodach;
their religious corporations were still wealthy, and their
sanctuaries still commanded the reverence of the people.
Wholly to displace and efface them was impossible, as
long as history continued to be written and the past to
be remembered. The sun-god of Sippara, the moon-god
of Ur or Harran, even En-lil of Nippur, all remained the
rivals of Merodach down to the latest days of Babylonian
existence. Nabonidos himself was forced to conform
to the prevailing sentiment; he bestowed almost as
much care on the temple of the moon-god at Harran,
and the temple of the sun-god at Sippara, as upon that of
Merodach at Babylon, though, it is true, he tells us that
it was Merodach who bade him restore the sanctuary of
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
Sin, while the sun-god of Sippara might be considered to
be Merodach himself under another name.<note place='foot'>It must also be remembered that the attentions lavished by Nabonidos
upon the older sanctuaries of Babylonia outside the walls of Babylon
belonged to the earlier part of his reign.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was thus history which prevented the rise of anything
like monotheism in Babylonia. It was impossible
to break with the past, and the past was bound up with
polytheism and with the existence of great cities, each
with its separate god and sanctuary and the minor
divinities who revolved around them. At the same time
the tendency to monotheism existed; and could the
Babylonian have blotted out the past, it might have
ended in the worship of but one god. As it was, the
language of the later inscriptions sometimes approaches
very nearly that of the monotheist. When Nebuchadrezzar
prays to Merodach, his words might often have
been those of a Jew; and even at an earlier date the
moon-god is called by his worshipper <q>supreme</q> in
earth and heaven, omnipotent and creator of all things;
while an old religious poem refers, in the abstract, to
<q>the god</q> who confers lordship on men. As was long
ago pointed out by Sir H. Rawlinson, Anu, whose written
name became synonymous with <q>god,</q> is identified with
various cosmic deities, both male and female, in a theological
list;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 54, No. 4; iii. 69, No. 1. In ii. 54, No. 3, the cosmic
deities are made <q>the mother(s) and father(s) of Anu</q> instead of being
identified with him. But the identification is doubtless really due to the
fact that <foreign rend='italic'>ana</foreign> meant <q>god</q> as well as <q>Anu.</q></note> and Dr. Pinches has published a tablet in
which the chief divinities of the Babylonian pantheon
are resolved into forms of Merodach.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Victoria Institute</hi>, xxviii. 8-10.</note> En-lil becomes
<q>the Merodach of sovereignty,</q> Nebo <q>the Merodach of
earthly possessions,</q> Nergal <q>the Merodach of war.</q> This
is but another way of expressing that identification of
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
the god of Babylon with the other deities of Babylonian
belief which, as we have seen, placed him at the head of
the divine hierarchy, and, by depriving them of their
attributes and powers, tended to reduce them into mere
angel-ministers of a supreme god.
</p>

<p>
There was yet another cause which prevented the
religion of Babylonia from assuming a monotheistic form.
As we have seen, the majority of the Babylonian
goddesses followed the usual Semitic type, and were
little else than reflections of the male divinity. But
there was one goddess who retained her independence,
and claimed equal rank with the gods. Against her
power and prerogatives the influence of Semitic theology
contended in vain. The Sumerian element continued
to exist in the mixed Babylonian nation, and, like the
woman who held a position in it which was denied her
where the Semite was alone dominant, the goddess Istar
remained the equal of the gods. Even her name never
assumed the feminine termination which denoted the
Semitic goddess; Semitised though she might be, she
continued to be essentially a Sumerian deity.
</p>

<p>
Many years ago, in my Hibbert Lectures, I first drew
attention to the fact that Istar belonged to the non-Semitic
part of the Babylonian population, and in both
name and attributes was foreign to Semitic modes of
thought. The best proof of this is to be found in the
transformations she underwent when her worship was
carried by Babylonian culture to the more purely Semitic
peoples of the West. In Arabia and Moab she became
a male deity; the ideas and functions connected with
her were incompatible in the Semitic mind with the conception
of a female divinity. Even in Babylonia itself
there were those who believed in a male Istar;<note place='foot'>Thus the god Tispak (the Susinak of Susa, K 92691, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> ii. 35) is
identified with Istar in <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> 35. 18, comp. ii. 57. 35; and Iskhara,
another name of Istar, is called a male deity with a wife, Almanâti
(<hi rend='italic'>Strassmaier</hi>, 3901). Professor Barton notices (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of American
Oriental Society</hi>, 21, pp. 186-188) that an inscription of Lugal-khaṡṡi, an
early king of Kis, is dedicated to <q>the king Nana and the lady
Nana.</q></note> and the
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
official theology itself spoke of an androgynous deity, of
an Istar who was at once a goddess and a god.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iii. 53. 30-9.</note> In
Canaan, where her female nature was accepted, she was
changed into a Semitic goddess; the feminine suffix was
attached to her name, and her attributes were assimilated
to those of the native goddess Ashêrah. In Assyria, too,
we can see the same process going on. The name of
Istar with the feminine termination of Semitic grammar
becomes a mere synonym of <q>goddess,</q> and, as in
Canaan, the Istars, or rather the Ashtoreths, mean merely
the goddesses of the popular cult, the female counterparts
of the Baalim or <q>Baals.</q> It was only the State religion,
which had its roots in Babylonia, that prevented Istar
of Nineveh or Istar of Arbela from becoming a Canaanitish
Ashtoreth.
</p>

<p>
This was the fate that had actually befallen some of
the old Sumerian deities. In the Sippara of Semitic
days, for example, the wife of the sun-god was the
goddess Â. But Â had once been the sun-god himself,
and texts exist in which he is still regarded as a god.
Sumerian grammar was genderless; there was no distinction
in it between masculine and feminine, and the
divine names of the Sumerian pantheon could consequently
be classified by the Semite as he would. He had only
to apply a feminine epithet to one of them, and it forthwith
became the name of a goddess. Sippara already had
its sun-god Samas: there was no room for another, and
Â accordingly became his wife. But in becoming his
wife she lost her individuality; her attributes and
powers were absorbed by Samas, and in the later Semitic
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
theology she serves only to complete the divine family
or triad.
</p>

<p>
Istar succeeded in escaping any such effacement or
degradation. Her worship was too deeply rooted in
Babylonia, and too intimately associated with the religious
traditions of the past. The same historical
reasons which prevented monotheism from developing
out of Babylonian polytheism prevented Istar from
degenerating into an Ashtoreth. At times she came
perilously near to such a fate: in the penitential psalms
we find the beginnings of it; and, when Babylon became
the head of the kingdom, the supremacy of Merodach
threatened the independence and authority of Istar even
more than it threatened those of the other <q>great gods.</q>
But the cult of Istar had been fixed and established long
before Merodach was more than a petty provincial god;
she was the goddess and patroness of Erech, and Erech
had once been the capital of a Babylonian empire. It
was needful that that fact should be forgotten before
Istar could be dethroned from the position she held in
the religion of Babylonia, whether official or popular.
</p>

<p>
All attempts to find a Semitic etymology for the name
of Istar have been a failure. We must be content to
leave it unexplained, and to recognise the foreign character
both of the name and of the goddess whom it
represented. In Babylonia the name was never
Semitised; the character of the goddess, on the other
hand, was adapted, though imperfectly, to Semitic modes
of thought. She took upon her the attributes of a
Baal, and presided over war as well as over love. One
result of this mingling of Semitic and Sumerian ideas
was the difficulty of fitting her into the family system of
Semitic theology. She could not have a wife, for she
was a goddess; it was equally difficult to assign to her
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
her shadow and counterpart, which was contrary to all
the preconceptions of the Semitic mind. Generally,
therefore, if not officially, she was conceived of as a
virgin, or at all events as a goddess who might indulge
in amours so long as they did not lead to regular
marriage. Even Tammuz was the bridegroom rather
than the husband of her youth, and he too had been
banished to the darkness of the underground world long
before Istar herself had interfered with the affairs of
men. She has been described as the female principle
corresponding with the male principle in the world: but
the description is incorrect; she was rather the male
principle in female form.
</p>

<p>
Istar at the outset was the spirit of the evening star.
In days, however, when astronomy was as yet in its
infancy, the evening and the morning stars were believed
to be the same. It was only in aftertimes that an
endeavour was made to distinguish between the Istar of
the evening and the Istar of the morning. Originally
they were one and the same, the herald at once of night
and day. It was on this account that Istar was
associated with Ana, the sky. The sky was her father,
for she was born from it at sunset and dawn; and if other
traditions or myths made her the daughter of the moon-god,
they were not accepted at Erech, the centre and
source of her cult.
</p>

<p>
In virtue of her origin she formed a triad with Samas
and Sin. The sun, the moon, and the evening star
divided, as it were, the heavens between them, and presided
over its destinies. They were the luminaries that
regulated the seasons of the year and determined the
orderly course of the present creation. Istar represents
<q>the stars </q> of Genesis that were made with the sun and
moon. But in the Babylonian system the triad of Istar,
Sin, and Samas was not made, they were deities that
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
were born. Before them was the older and higher triad
of Anu, Bel, and Ea,&mdash;the sky, the earth, and the water,&mdash;the
three elements of which the whole universe was
formed.
</p>

<p>
How the spirit of the evening star came in time to be
the goddess of love, is not difficult to understand. Even
modern poets have sung of the evening as the season of
lovers, when the work and business of the day are over,
and words of love can be whispered under the pale light
of the evening star. But this alone will not explain the
licentious worship that was carried on at Erech in the
name of Istar. It was essentially Semitic in its character,
and illustrates that intensity of belief which made
the Semite sacrifice all he possessed to the deity whom
he adored. The prostitution that was practised in the
name of Istar had the same origin as the sacrifice of the
firstborn, or the orgies that were celebrated in the
temples of the sun-god.
</p>

<p>
At Erech, Istar was served by organised bands of
unmarried maidens who prostituted themselves in honour
of the goddess. The prostitution was strictly religious,
as much so as the ceremonial cannibalism formerly prevalent
among the South Sea Islanders. In return for
the lives they led, the <q>handmaids of Istar</q> were independent
and free from the control of men. They formed
a religious community, the distinguishing feature of
which was the power of indulging the passions of
womanhood without the disabilities which amongst a
Semitic population these would otherwise have brought.
The <q>handmaid of Istar</q> owned allegiance only to the
goddess she served. Her freedom was dependent on her
priesthood, but in return for this freedom she had to give
up all the pleasures of family life. It was a self-surrender
which placed the priestess outside the restrictions
of the family code, and was yet for the sake of a
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
principle which made that family code possible. Baal,
the lord of the Semitic family, claimed the firstborn as
his right, and Istar or Ashtoreth similarly demanded the
service of its daughters.
</p>

<p>
It was the same in Canaan as at Erech. Did the
rites, and the beliefs on which the rites were based,
migrate from Babylonia to the West along with Babylonian
culture, or were they a common Semitic heritage
in which Erech and Phœnicia shared alike? It is
difficult to give a precise answer to the question. On
the one hand, we know that the Ashtoreth of Canaan
was of Babylonian birth, and that in days far remote the
theology of the Canaanite was profoundly influenced by
that of Babylonia; on the other hand, the rites with
which Istar was worshipped were confined in Babylonia
to Erech; it was there only that her <q>handmaids</q> and
eunuch-priests were organised into communities, and that
unspeakable abominations were practised in her name.
The Istar who was adored elsewhere was a chaste and
passionless goddess, the mother of her people whom she
had begotten, or their stern leader in war. It does not
seem likely that a cult which was unable to spread in
Babylonia or Assyria should nevertheless have taken
deep root in Phœnicia, had there not already been there
a soil prepared to receive it. Erech was essentially a
Semitic city; its supreme god Anu had all the features
of the Semitic Baal, <q>the lord of heaven</q>; and its goddess
Istar, Sumerian though she may have been in origin,
like Anu himself, had clothed herself in a Semitic
dress.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, there was another side to the worship of
Istar which bears indirect testimony to the Semitic
origin of her cult at Erech. By the side of the Istar of
the official faith there was another Istar, who presided
over magic and witchcraft. Her priestesses were the
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
witches who plied their unholy calling under the shadow
of night, and mixed the poisonous philtres which drained
away the strength of their hapless victims. The black
Istar, as we may call her, was a parody of the goddess of
love; and the rites with which she was adored, and the
ministers by whom she was served, were equally parodies
of the cult that was carried on at Erech. But the black
Istar was not only a parody of the goddess of the State
religion, she was also the Istar of the popular creed, of
the creed of that part of the population, in fact, which
was least intermixed with Semitic elements and least
influenced by Semitic beliefs. It was amongst this
portion of the nation that the old Sumerian animism
lingered longest and resisted the purer teaching of the
educated class. The Semitic conceptions which underlay
the worship of Istar at Erech were never thoroughly
assimilated by it; all that it could do was to create a
parody and caricature of the official cult, adapting it to
those older beliefs and ideas which bad found their
centre in the temple of En-lil. The black Istar was a
Sumerian ghost masquerading in Semitic garb.
</p>

<p>
As Bel attracted to himself the other gods, appropriating
their names and therewith their essence and
attributes, so Istar attracted the unsubstantial goddesses
of the Babylonian pantheon. They became mere epithets
of the one female divinity who maintained her independent
existence by the side of the male gods. One by
one they were identified with her person, and passed
into the Istarât, or Istars, of the later creed. Like the
Baalim, the Istarât owed what separate individuality
they possessed to geography. On the theological side
the Istar of Nineveh was identical with the Istar of
Arbela; what distinguished them was the local sphere
over which they held jurisdiction. The difference between
them was purely geographical: the one was
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
attached to a particular area over which her power extended,
and where she was adored, while the other was
the goddess of another city&mdash;that was all. It was the
same goddess, but a different local cult. The deity
remained the same, but her relations, both to her
worshippers and to the other gods, were changed. There
is no transmutation of form as in Egypt, but a change
of relations, which have their origin in geographical
variety.
</p>

<p>
In Babylonia, however, Istar was not so completely
without a rival as she was in Assyria. There was
another city of ancient fame which, like Erech, was
under the protection of a goddess rather than of a god.
This was one of the two Sipparas on the banks of the
Euphrates, which is distinguished in the inscriptions
from the Sippara of Samas as the Sippara of Anunit.
The feminine termination of the name of Anunit indicates
that here again we have a goddess who, in the
form in which we know her, is essentially Semitic. But
it is only in the form in which we know her that such
is the case. The origin of Anunit goes back to Sumerian
times. She was in the beginning merely an Anunna or
<q>spirit</q> of the earth, as sexless as the other spirits of
Sumerian belief, and lacking all the characteristics of a
Semitic divinity.<note place='foot'>I can suggest no better etymology for the word Anunna than that
proposed in my Hibbert Lectures, p. 182. It is supported by K 2100,
col. iv., where the Sumerian pronunciation of Anunna-ki is given as
Enu-kki, <q>the lord of the earth.</q> When the <q>spirits of the earth</q>
came to be distinguished from <q>the angels</q> or <q>spirits</q> of the air, the
form Anunna-ki or Anunna-ge, <q>the spirit of the earth</q> or <q>lower
world,</q> became more usual than the simple Anunna. The latter is used
of the Igigi or <q>angels</q> in K 4629, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi>, and of the Anunna-ki in
<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 1, 2, col. iv. 3.</note> It was not till Sippara became the
seat of a Semitic empire that the Anunna or Sumerian
<q>spirit</q> was transformed into Anunit the goddess. The
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
transformation here was accompanied by the same outward
change as that which turned the Babylonian Istar
into the Ashtoreth of Canaan. For a time it seemed as
though Anunit rather than Istar would become the
supreme goddess of Semitic cult; but the political predominance
of Sippara passed away with the fall of the
empire of Sargon of Akkad, and historical conservatism
alone preserved the name and influence of its goddess.
As time went on, Anunit tended more and more to sink
into the common herd of Babylonian goddesses, or to be
identified with Istar. As long as the Sumerian element
continued to be strong in the Babylonian people and
their religion, Anunit retained the position which the
mixture of the Semite and Sumerian had created for
her; with the growing dominance of the Semitic spirit,
her independence and individuality departed, and she
became, like Beltis or Gula, merely the female complement
of the god. Perhaps the process was hastened
by the grammatical termination that had been added to
her name.
</p>

<p>
Wherever, in fact, Semitic influence prevailed, the
goddess, as opposed to the god, tended to disappear. It
was but a step from the conception of a god with a
colourless counterpart, whose very existence seemed to
be due to the necessities of grammar, to that of a deity
who absorbed within himself the female as well as the
male principles of the universe, and who stood alone and
unmated. A goddess who depended for her existence
on a grammatical accident could have no profound or
permanent hold on the belief of the people; she necessarily
fell into the background, and the prerogatives
which had belonged to her were transferred to the god.
Istar herself, thanks to the masculine form of her name,
became a god in Southern Arabia, and was identified
with Chemosh in Moab, while even in Babylonia and
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
Assyria she assumed the attributes of a male divinity,
and was adored as the goddess of war as well as of love.<note place='foot'>Hoffmann remarks in regard to the Aramaic inscriptions of Zenjirli
(<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</hi>, xi. p. 253): <q>The most interesting fact is
that even the theological Hadad-stela makes no mention of a female
goddess.</q></note>
In Assyria, indeed, her warlike character predominated:
she took the place of the war-gods of Babylonia, and
armed herself with the falchion and bow.
</p>

<p>
I shall have hereafter to point out how this tendency
on the part of the goddess to vanish, as it were, out of
sight, leaving the god alone in possession, resulted in
Assyria in raising its supreme god Assur to something
of the position occupied by Yahveh in Israel. Assur is
wifeless; now and again, it is true, a wife is assigned to
him by the pedantry of the scribes, but who it should be
was never settled; and that he needed a wife at all, was
never acknowledged generally. Like Chemosh in Moab,
Assur reigns alone; and though the immemorial influence
of Babylonia kept alive the worship of Istar by the side
of him, it was Assur and Assur only who led the Assyrian
armies to victory, and in whose name they subdued the
disobedient. It was not until the kings of Assyria
became kings also of Babylon that Istar encroached on
the rights of Assur, or that an Assyrian monarch betook
himself to her rather than to the god of his fathers in
the hour of his necessity. As long as the capital
remained at the old city of Assur, none but the god
Assur might direct the counsels and campaigns of its
princes, or confer upon them the crown of sovereignty.
When Tiglath-pileser III. acknowledged himself the son
of Bel-Merodach, and received from his hands the right
to rule, it was a sign that the older Assyrian dynasty
had passed away, that the kingdom had become a
cosmopolitan empire, and that the venerable traditions
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
of Babylon had subjugated its conquerors from the north.
The mixed races of Babylonia had overcome the purer
Semites of Assyria, Istar had prevailed against Assur,
and Semitic monotheism sought a home in the further
West.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture V. Sumerian And Semitic Conceptions Of The Divine:
Assur And Monotheism.</head>

<p>
In the preceding lectures I have assumed that the conception
of the deity which we find in the later historical
monuments of Babylonia and Assyria was of Semitic
origin, differing radically from that formed of the godhead
by the earlier Sumerian population. But it will
doubtless be asked what basis there is for such an
assumption; why may we not suppose that the later
conception has developed naturally and without any
violent break from older beliefs which were equally
Semitic? Why, in short, must we regard the animism
which underlay the religion of Babylonia as Sumerian,
and not rather as the earliest form of Semitic faith?
</p>

<p>
The first and most obvious answer to the question
would be, the fact that the older names of the superhuman
beings who became the gods of the later creed are not
Semitic, but Sumerian. En-lil of Nippur is the Sumerian
En-lila, <q>lord of the ghost(s)</q>; when he becomes a
Semitic god he receives the Semitic title of Bilu, Baal,
<q>the lord.</q> And the further fact that in many cases
the Sumerian name continued to be used in Semitic
times, sometimes slightly changed, sometimes adapted to
the needs of Semitic grammar, proves not only that the
Sumerian preceded the Semitic, but also that the Sumerian
cult on its literary and philological side was assimilated
by the Semitic settlers in Babylonia. The gods and
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
goddesses of Babylonia were Sumerian before they were
Semitic; though they wear a Semitic dress, we have to
seek their ancestry outside the Semitic world of ideas.
</p>

<p>
As we know them, they are clothed in human form.
The deities whose figures are found on the seal-cylinders
of Babylonia or engraved on the walls of the Assyrian
palaces are all alike in <q>the likeness of man.</q> Bel-Merodach
is as much a man as the king whom he
adopted as his son; the sun-god who rises between the
twin mountains of the dawn steps forth as a human giant
to run his course; and Istar is a woman in mind and
thought as well as in outward form. There are no
animal gods in Babylonia, no monstrous combinations of
man and beast such as meet us in the theology of Egypt.
Not but that such combinations were known to the
Babylonians. But they belonged to the primeval world
of chaos; they were the brood of Tiamât, the dragon of
lawlessness and night, the demons who had been banished
into outer darkness beyond the world of light and of
god-fearing men. Like the devils of medieval belief,
they were the divine beings of an alien faith which the
gods of the new-comers had exiled to the limbo of a dead
past. Even the subterranean Hades of Semitic Babylonia
recognised them not. The gods worshipped by the
Semite were Baalim or <q>Lords,</q> like the men whom
they protected, and whose creators they were believed
to be.
</p>

<p>
Wherever the pure Semite is found, this belief in the
anthropomorphic character of the deity is found also.
Perhaps it is connected with that distinguishing characteristic
of his grammar which divides the world into
the masculine and the feminine, the male and the female.
At any rate the Semite made his god in the likeness of
men, and taught, conversely, that men had been made in
the likeness of the gods. The two beliefs are but the
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
counter sides of the same shield; the theomorphic man
implies an anthropomorphic god. The god, in fact, was
but an amplified man with amplified human powers; his
shape was human, so too were his passions and his
thoughts. Even the life that was in man was itself the
breath of the god. That man was not immortal like
the gods, was but an accident; he had failed to eat of
the food of immortality or to drink of the waters of life,
and death therefore reigned in this lower world. The
gods themselves might die; Tammuz, the spouse of Istar,
had been slain by the boar's tusk of angry summer, and
carried into the realm of Hades,<note place='foot'>The origin and nature of Tammuz have been investigated in my
Hibbert Lectures, pp. 220-245, and need not be repeated here. He was
primarily a Zi or spirit worshipped at Eridu, where he was known as <q>the
Son of the Spirit of the Deep,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Ea. He was, in fact, the primitive
sun-god of Eridu, though his character underwent strange transformations
in the course of his identification with Nin-girṡu (Inguriṡa) and other
gods. But Tammuz was a sun-god who spent half his annual life in the
underworld, or, according to another view, as fellow-warder with Nin-gis-zida
of the gates of heaven. Hence he pastures his cattle in the fields
beyond the river Khubur, the ocean-stream that encircles the earth, on
the road to the land of the dead (Craig, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Texts</hi>, i. p. 17). On
the other hand, he was also said to dwell in the midst of the cosmic
temple of Ea at Eridu, between the Tigris and Euphrates (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv.
15. 58-59). It is possible, though not yet proved, that in Tammuz two
deities have been combined together, the sun-god and the vegetation of
the spring which the young sun of the year brings into existence. However
this may be, in Tammuz and Nin-gis-zida I see the Babylonian
prototypes of the two pillars Jachin and Boaz erected by Solomon in
front of the temple (1 Kings vii. 21). Nin-gis-zida means <q>the lord of the
upright post</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>bil itsi kêni</foreign> in Semitic Babylonian), and thus corresponds
with Jachin.</note> and the temple of
Merodach at Babylon was also known as his tomb. As
the gods were born, so could they die; they could marry
also and beget children, and they needed meat and drink
like the sons of men. Indeed, the world of the gods was
a duplicate and counterpart of the world of mankind.
On <q>the mountain of the world,</q> the Babylonian Olympos,
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
the supreme god held his court; around him were ranged
his subjects and servants, for there were servants in
heaven as there were on earth; celestial armies went
forth at his bidding, and there were wars among the
gods as among men. Even theft was not unknown
among them; a legend tells us, for instance, how the
god Zu stole the tablets of destiny which were hung
like the Urim and Thummim on the breast of <q>father
Bel,</q> and therewith acquired for awhile the right and
power to control the fate of the universe. As far back
as we can trace the history of Semitic religion, whether
in Babylonia, in Canaan, or in Arabia, its fundamental
conception is always the same; the gods are human, and
men are divine.
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising, therefore, that as soon as the
Semitic element becomes paramount in Babylonia, the
king becomes a god. At Babylon he was made the
adopted son of Bel-Merodach by taking the hand of
the deity, and thereby became himself a Bel, a ruler
of <q>the people of Bel</q> over whom he was henceforth to
exercise undisputed lordship. In earlier days, Sargon of
Akkad, the founder of the first Semitic empire in Western
Asia, and his son Naram-Sin, were explicitly deified.
Naram-Sin is even addressed as <q>the god of Akkad</q>;<note place='foot'>Thureau-Dangin in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et
à l'Archéologie égyptiennes et assyriennes</hi>, xix. pp. 185-187.</note>
and a seal-cylinder found by Gen. di Cesnola in Cyprus
describes its owner as <q>the servant of the god Naram-Sin.</q><note place='foot'>Published and translated by me in the <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Society of
Biblical Archæology</hi>, v. (1877) p. 441, where I pointed out for the first
time that the early Babylonian kings were deified.</note>
The title of <q>god</q> is assumed by the Semitic
successors of Sargon, to whatever city or dynasty they
belonged; even the Sumerian princes in Southern Babylonia
followed the example of their Semitic suzerains, and
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
Gudea, the high priest of Lagas, built temples to his own
godhead, where for long centuries his cult continued to
be observed, and sacrifices and offerings to be made to
him.<note place='foot'>Scheil in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xviii. p. 71, xxi. p. 27.</note> The occupation of Babylonia by the Arab or
Canaanite dynasty to which Amraphel belonged, made
no difference in the divine honours paid to the king; he
still assumed the title of <q>god,</q> and his subjects adored
him by the side of Bel. But a change came with the
conquest of Babylonia by Kassite hordes from the mountains
of Elam; the foreign kings ceased to be divine, and
the title of <q>god</q> is given to them no more. As the
doctrine of the divine right of kings passed away in
England with the Stuarts, so too the belief in the
divinity of the king disappeared in Babylonia with the
fall of the Semitic dynasties. Nothing could show more
plainly its essentially Semitic origin, and the little hold
it possessed upon the non-Semitic part of the population.
The king was a god only so long as he was a Semite, or
subject to Semitic influence and supremacy.
</p>

<p>
The apotheosis of the king is thus coeval with the
rise of Semitic domination in Babylonia. In the older
Sumerian epoch we look in vain for any traces of it.
Man was not yet divine, for the gods were not yet human.
There was as yet no Semitic Bel, and En-lil of Nippur
was but a <q>lord of ghost(s).</q>
</p>

<p>
But we have better testimony to the fact than the
ghosts of Nippur. Behind the human figures of the
Semitic gods the primitively pictorial character of the
cuneiform signs enables us to discern the lineaments of
figures that belong to a wholly different sphere of religious
thought. They are the figures not of men, but of brute
beasts. The name of En-lil was denoted by a composite
sign which represented the word <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign>, <q>a ram</q>;<note place='foot'>See Brünnow, <hi rend='italic'>Classified List</hi>, No. 8883.</note> that of
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
Ea by the ideograph which stood for <foreign rend='italic'>dara</foreign>, <q>the antelope.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 55. 27, iv. 25. 40. <hi rend='italic'>Dara</hi>, Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>turakhu</foreign>, is shown to
be <q>an antelope</q> by the figure of an antelope, ending in a fish, which is
stated to represent Ea on a boundary-stone from Susa published in de
Morgan's <hi rend='italic'>Délégation en Perse</hi>, vol. i., and explained by Scheil in the
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xxiii. pp. 96, 97. The figure is accompanied by the
symbol of Ea, a weapon which terminates in the head of a ram.</note>
En-lil, accordingly, was once a ram; Ea, an antelope.
There are other deities which reveal their first shapes in
similar fashion. The wife of Hadad, for example, was
Azaga-ṡuga, <q>the milch-goat</q> of En-lil, from whom the
primitive Sumerian shepherd derived his milk.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iii. 68. 12-14. See my Hibbert Lectures, p. 286. For <q>the
cow</q> Bau, see above, p. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>. Nergal or Allamu was originally the gazelle
(Brünnow, <hi rend='italic'>Classified List</hi>, Nos. 1906, 1907).</note> Merodach
himself, or rather his Sumerian prototype at Eridu,
was once Asari-elim, <q>the princely ram</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 18. 57, 55. 69, iv. 3. 25.</note> a striking
title when we remember that Osiris, too, was addressed
in Egypt as Ati, <q>the prince,</q> and identified with
the ram of Mendes. Even Zu, the divine thief who
stole the tablets of destiny, was the storm-bird, the
forefather alike of the roc of the <hi rend='italic'>Arabian Nights</hi>
and of the Chinese storm-bird, <q>which, in flying,
obscures the sun, and of whose quills the water-tuns
are made.</q>
</p>

<p>
In many cases, however, the original forms of the
Babylonian divinities survived only in the animals upon
whose backs they were depicted as standing, or with
whom the gem-cutter associated them on seals.<note place='foot'>Thus the monkey is associated with Nu-gidda, <q>the dwarf,</q> who in
his turn accompanies the moon-god.</note> Now
and again an attempt was made to combine them with
the human figure. Thus Ea is at times represented as
clothed in the skin of a fish, a fitting symbol of the
relation between the newer and older religions of Babylonia
and the antagonistic views of the godhead entertained
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
by the races that dwelt there. At other times
the animal form is relegated to that great company of
demons and inferior spirits amongst whom room was
found for the multitudinous ghosts of Sumerian belief.
Where it is not altogether excluded from the world of
gods and men, it exists only as the humble retainer of
one of the human gods. As Merodach was accompanied
by his four divine dogs, so Ea was attended by sacred
bulls. They guarded the approach to the <q>field</q> and
<q>house of Eden,</q> like the colossal figures, with bull-like
bodies and the heads of men, that guarded the gates of
the palace or temple. They were, in fact, the cherubim
who forbade approach to the tree of life (or knowledge),&mdash;that
sacred palm which an old Babylonian hymn tells
us was planted beside the pathway of Ea in Eridu, where
the god had his house in the centre of the earth, pouring
from his hands the waters of fertility that flowed down
in the twofold streams of the Tigris and Euphrates.<note place='foot'>The last line of this hymn (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 15. 52 sqq.), of which I have
given a translation in my Hibbert Lectures, p. 238, has been discovered
by Dr. Pinches, and published by him in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Transactions of
the Victoria Institute</hi>, xxix. p. 44.</note>
In later art, however, the bull-like form disappeared, and
the guardians of the sacred tree were represented in
human shape, but with the heads of eagles. The change
of form was due to the same striving to humanise the
superhuman beings of Sumerian belief as that which had
given a man's head to the colossal bulls; where the
divine being had become a god in the Semitic sense of
the word, all traces of his bestial origin were swept away;
where he remained as it were only on the margin of the
divine world, the bestial element was thrust as far as
possible out of sight, and combined with the features of
a man. The cherub was allowed to retain his bull's body
or his eagle's head, but it was on condition that he never
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
rose to the rank of a god, and that human members were
combined with his animal form.
</p>

<p>
The secondary creatures of the divine world of the
Babylonians thus resembled, in outward form, the gods of
Egypt. But whereas in Egypt it was the gods themselves
who joined the head of the beast to the body of
the man, in Babylonia it was only the semi-divine spirits
and monsters of the popular creed who were thus partly
bestial and partly human. The official theology could
not banish them altogether; they became accordingly
the servants and followers of the gods, or else the rabble-host
of Tiamât, the impersonation of chaos and sin. Like
the devils and angels of medieval belief, they were included
among the three hundred spirits of heaven and
the six hundred spirits of earth.<note place='foot'>In Reisner, <q>Sumerisch-babylonische Hymnen nach Thontafeln
griechischer Zeit,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus den orientalischen Sammlungen</hi>,
x. p. 135, 25-32, and p. 139, 151-158, we read, <q>the great gods
are 50; the gods of destiny are 7; the Anunnaki of heaven are 300; the
Anunnaki of earth are 600.</q></note> The spirits of heaven
formed <q>the hosts</q> of which the supreme deity was lord,
and whom he led into battle against his foes; Nebo was
the minister and lieutenant of Merodach and <q>the
hosts of the heaven and earth,</q> therefore it was his duty
to muster and drill.<note place='foot'>Hence he is called by Nebuchadrezzar <foreign rend='italic'>pakid kissat samê u irtsitim</foreign>,
<q>marshaller of the hosts of heaven and earth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> i. 51. 13).</note> The Anunna-ki or <q>spirits of
earth</q> had their habitation in the subterranean world of
Hades, where they sat on a throne of gold guarding the
waters of life, while the Igigi or angels dwelt rather with
the gods in the heaven of light and blissfulness. It was
on this account that Assur-nazir-pal calls Nin-ip <q>the
champion of the Igigi,</q> and that elsewhere the god
receives the title of <q>chief of the angels.</q> But it was
only in the later ages of Babylonian religion, when the
Semitic conception of divinity had become predominant,
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
that a distinction was made between the spirits of the
earth and the air. It was only for the Semites that
there were spirits of the underworld and angels of
heaven; the Sumerian had known no difference between
them; they were all alike Anunnas or spirits, and
Nin-ip had been lord, not of the Igigi alone, but of the
Anunna-ki as well.<note place='foot'>For the Anunna-ki and Igigi, see above, p. <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</note> He had, in fact, been one of them
himself; he was the minister and attendant of En-lil,
and it was never forgotten that, like the Anunna-ki,
he was the <q>offspring of Ê-kur,</q> the name at once
of the temple of Nippur and of the underground world
of Hades. Sometimes he is said to have sprung from
Ê-sarra, <q>the house of the (spirit)-hosts.</q> He had been
a ghost in Nippur before he was transformed into a
Semitic god.
</p>

<p>
But he had been a ghost who was associated with the
dawn, and he thus became identified in the early Semitic
age with the rising sun. His solar character raised him
to the rank of a Baal, and, consequently, of a god. His
older attributes, however, still clung to him. He was a
sun-god who had risen out of the earth and of the darkness
of night, and in him, therefore, the darker and more
violent side of the sun-god was reflected.<note place='foot'>The solar character of Nin-ip was first pointed out by myself in the
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, ii. (1873) p. 246, and
again in my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 152, 153. He was probably called Bêr
in Assyrian, but the Cilician Nineps shows that he was also known by
his Sumerian title of Nin-ip. See my paper in the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi> xx. 7,
pp. 261, 262.</note> He became
essentially a god of war, and as such a special favourite
of the Assyrian kings. He it was who carried destruction
over the earth at the time of the Deluge, while the
Anunna-ki followed him with their blazing torches; and
he is the brother of En-nugi, the god from whose hands
there is no escape. With the spread of solar worship,
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
the solar features of Nin-ip naturally grew more marked.
At times he was the god of the noonday as well as of
the dawn, for it was at noon that the rays of the sun
were fiercest and most deadly to man; at times he was
assimilated to his fellow sun-god Merodach, and made a
son of Ea. The syncretic epoch of Babylonian religion
had truly arrived when Ea and En-lil were thus interchanged,
and the teaching of Nippur and Eridu united in
the solar cult!
</p>

<p>
But we have glimpses of a time when Nin-ip was not
yet a god in human form, much less a solar Baal. His
name is a title merely, and originally denoted the sexless
spirit, who was indifferently <q>lord</q> and <q>lady of the
veil.</q><note place='foot'>The ideograph denotes the <foreign rend='italic'>keffîya</foreign>, corresponding both to the veil and
to the turban. In its earliest pictorial form it represents a veil covering
both the head and face, and leaving only the hair at the back of the
head visible. It was usually termed <foreign rend='italic'>uras</foreign>, a word borrowed by Semitic
Babylonian under the form of <foreign rend='italic'>urasu</foreign>, which in its turn created the verb
<foreign rend='italic'>arâsu</foreign>, <q>to veil,</q> and the word <foreign rend='italic'>aristu</foreign>, <q>a cloak.</q> The <foreign rend='italic'>keffîya</foreign> was also
known in Sumerian as <foreign rend='italic'>mutra</foreign>, Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>mutru</foreign>, from which the Greek μίτρα
was borrowed. The <foreign rend='italic'>mitra</foreign> properly signified the Oriental turban; but as
no such head-dress was worn by the Greeks, it is already used by Homer
for the girdle of the waist. Besides the value of <foreign rend='italic'>uras</foreign>, the ideograph also
had the value of <foreign rend='italic'>dara</foreign> (in Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>nibittu</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>iṡkhu</foreign>, <q>a veil</q>). It is
possible that the actual pronunciation of the name Nin-ip was In-dar.</note>
</p>

<p>
The veil was worn in sign of mourning, for the head
was covered in sleep and death. Like the cloak which
enfolded the shade of Samuel, it symbolised the denizen
of the underworld. At first it would seem to have been
merely a veil that covered the head and face, like the
<foreign rend='italic'>keffîya</foreign> of the modern Arab; in course of time it was
extended to the cloak in which the sleeper or the dead
man could be wrapped. But in either case it was a
symbol of the world below, and as such became in the
Semitic age the garment of the mourner. The god who
was <q>lord of the veil</q> must once have dwelt beneath
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
the earth, and been himself one of those spirits of darkness
whose faces were veiled from the sight of the
living.
</p>

<p>
Nin-ip, then, must have been one of the Anunna-ki,
a spirit of the earth and the land of Hades, before he
assumed the form of a Semitic Baal, and clothed himself
with the attributes of the sun-god. And the shape in
which he appeared to his worshippers was that of a swine.
We are told that Nin-ip was one with Nin-sakh, <q>the
lord of the swine</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 57. 39.</note> and the servant of El-lil, who was
adored at Lagas in Sumerian days, and to whom a temple
was erected even at Erech. That the swine should be
connected with the underground world of the dead, is not
surprising. We find the same connection in Keltic
mythology. There, too, the swine are the cattle of
Hades, and it was from the subterranean fields of Hades
that they were transported by Pryderi to the earth
above.<note place='foot'>Gwydion induced Pryderi by stratagem to give some of them to him,
and so carried them from Dyved to North Wales; Rhys, Hibbert
Lectures on <hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi>, pp. 242-244.</note> The swine turns up the ground in his search
for food; even to-day he is used to hunt for truffles, and
primitive man saw in his action an attempt to communicate
with the spirits of the underworld.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 19. 49<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, <q>the spirits of the earth I made grope like
swine in the hollows.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
From the earth-spirit with the veiled face, who incarnated
himself in the swine, the distance is great to
the solar hero and warrior god of the Semitic age. In
fact, the distance is too great to be spanned by any
natural process of evolution. It is a distance in kind
and not in degree. It presupposes fundamentally
different conceptions of religion, animism on the one
side and anthropomorphic gods on the other. If we are
to listen to fashionable theories of the origin of religion,
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
we start in the one case with the fetish, in the other
case with the worship of ancestors. The difference is
racial: wherever we find the Semite, in all periods of his
history, his gods are human and not made in the form of
the beast.
</p>

<p>
But the Semite, though he moulded the later
religion of Babylonia, could not transform it altogether.
The Sumerian element in the population was never
extirpated, and it is probable that if we knew more of
the religion of the people as opposed to the official
theology, we should find that it remained comparatively
little affected by Semitic influence. The witchcraft and
necromancy that flourished is a proof of this; even the
State religion was compelled to recognise it, and, like
Brahmanism in the presence of the native cults of India,
to lend it its sanction and control. It is instructive
to observe what a contrast there was in this respect
between the official religion of Babylonia and that of the
more purely Semitic Israelites. Witchcraft and necromancy
were practised also in Israel, but there they were
forbidden by the law and suppressed by the head of the
State. In Babylonia, however, the local deities were for
the most part of Sumerian origin, and in spite of their
Semitic colouring and dress not unfrequently retained
their old Sumerian names. Babylonian religion could
not wholly repudiate its origin and parentage; the
superstructure might be Semitic, but its basis was
Sumerian. Like the Sumerian words which had been
adopted into the language, the names of the gods
remained to testify to the fact that the people and their
religion were alike mixed. And with the names went
early beliefs and legends, fragments of folk-lore and
ritual which had descended from a non-Semitic past.
The official creed found a niche for each of them as best
it could, but the assimilation was never more than
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
partial, and from time to time we meet with practices
and conceptions which are alien to the official faith.
</p>

<p>
There were many expedients for getting rid of the
multitudinous spirits of the ancient creed who had not
been transmuted into Semitic deities. They might, as
we have seen, be herded together in the indistinguishable
crowd of spirits of heaven and earth that formed the
angel-hosts of the gods of light, or else be transformed
into demons in the train of Tiamât, the impersonation of
chaos. Some of them might be set apart as the special
servants and messengers of the gods, and occupy the
place of archangels in the celestial hierarchy. But it
was also possible to call in the aid of cosmology, and
turn them into elemental powers representing successive
stages in the history of creation. They thus continued
to belong to that inchoate period of Babylonian religion
when as yet the Semitic gods had not come into
existence, and at the same time they could be identified
with those gods in the exercise of their creative power.
In the language of later metaphysic, they thus became
the successive thoughts of the creator realising themselves
in the successive acts of the creation, like the
æons of Gnosticism which emanate one from the other
as the realised thoughts of God. The idea is doubtless
a late one, and belongs to an age of philosophy; but it
represents an attempt to grapple with the difficulties
presented by the opposing Sumerian and Semitic elements
in Babylonian religion, and to reconcile them together.
It presupposes that identification of one god with
another which the solar cult and the Semitic conception
of the goddess had made possible, and so takes us one
step further in the direction of monotheism. The divine
or superhuman beings of the Sumerian creed are not
merely identified with a particular god, but are even
transformed into the male and female principles which
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
his government of the world or the act of creation
compels him to exhibit in concrete form.<note place='foot'>See, for example, <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 54. 3 <hi rend='italic'>Obv.</hi> 4-14, 4. 37-45.</note>
</p>

<p>
Before Babylonian theosophy could arrive thus far,
two things were necessary. The gods had to be arranged
in a divine hierarchy, and the identification of one with
the other had to become possible. The hierarchical
arrangement followed from the Semitic conception of
divinity. If Baal were a counterpart of the human
father, there would be a divine family and a divine court
modelled on the pattern of those of his worshippers.
The god would have not only his wife and children, but
his slaves and ministers as well. The deities of heaven
would thus fall into orderly groups of higher and lower
rank; the higher gods would tend to separate themselves
more and more from those of subordinate degree, and the
latter to sink into the position of second-rate intelligences,
who stood midway between the gods and men, and depended
on <q>the great gods</q> for their offices and existence.
</p>

<p>
The conception of a divine messenger or angel who
carried the orders of the higher god from heaven to
earth and interpreted his will to men, goes back to an
early period in the history of Babylonian religion. We
can trace it to the time when the Sumerian first began to
be affected by Semitic influence. The <foreign rend='italic'>sukkal</foreign> or <q>angel</q>-minister
plays a prominent part in primitive Babylonian
theology, but it is noticeable that he is usually
a son of the god whose messages he conveys to gods and
men. Asari or Merodach is at once the son and the
minister of Ea; Nin-ip, of En-lil. The fact points to an
age when Sumerian animism had already been succeeded
by Semitic Baalism; the spirit or ghost had become a
god in human shape, who begat children and required an
envoy.
</p>

<p>
When Merodach became the god of Babylon, and
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
with the rise of his city to political power entered the
circle of the supreme gods, he in his turn needed a
messenger. The latter was found in the god of the
neighbouring city of Borsippa. The growth of Babylon
was accompanied by the decay of Borsippa, which in
time was reduced to a mere suburb of the rival town.
The god of the suburb was necessarily annexed by the
god of the city which had absorbed it, and as necessarily
became his follower and servant. Khammurabi, to whom
Babylon owed its position and influence, even transferred
the ancient temple of the god of Borsippa to the god of
Babylon, and included him among the inferior deities to
whom chapels were erected in the great sanctuary of
Merodach.<note place='foot'>There is no reason for holding that the temple of Ê-Zida rebuilt by
Khammurabi at Borsippa, was any other than the old Ê-Zida which was
dedicated to Nebo.</note> But the god of Borsippa had once been as
independent and supreme in his own city as Merodach
was at Babylon. He had been addressed as <q>the
maker</q> of the universe and the irrigator of the fields,
and the origin of the cuneiform system of writing was
ascribed to him. The Semites called him the Nabium
or <q>Prophet,</q> and it was under this title of Nabium or
Nebo that he became the minister of Merodach. The
name was appropriate in his twofold character of
interpreter of the will of Bel and patron of literature,
and was carried by Babylonian conquest into the distant
West. There Moses died in Moab on the summit of
Mount Nebo, and cities bearing the name stood within
the borders of Reuben and Judah.
</p>

<p>
It was doubtless the association of Nebo with
Merodach that caused him, like Thoth in Egypt, to
become the patron of literature and the god of the
scribes. The culture-god was as it were divided into
two; while Merodach retained the functions peculiar to
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
a Semitic Baal, Nebo watched over the library and
school, and encouraged the study of the script which had
been invented by him. The older claims of Ea fell into
the background and were forgotten; it was no longer
the god of Eridu, but Nebo, who had written the first
book, and instructed mankind in the elements of culture.
The marshal's staff, which Nebo had wielded as organiser
of <q>the hosts of heaven and earth,</q> now became the rod
of the scribe, and a consort was created for him in the
person of Tasmit or <q>Hearing.</q> In Assyria, where the
worship of Assur prevented any development of that of
his rival Merodach, Nebo became a special favourite of
the literary class, who derived their knowledge and
inspiration from Babylon. Assur-bani-pal never wearies
of telling us how Nebo and Tasmit had <q>made broad
his ears and enlightened his eyes,</q> so that he had collected
and republished the books and tablets of the kings who
had gone before him.
</p>

<p>
As minister of Merodach, Nebo passed into the solar
circle. In Egypt he would have been absorbed by the
more influential god, but in Babylonia the Semitic conception
of Merodach as a Baal who required his minister
and envoy like an earthly king, stood in the way of
any such identification. He consequently retained his
personality, and it was another god who was identified
with him. This was Nusku, once the fire which blazed
up into flame and purified the sacrifice. With the
spread of the solar cult Nusku became a local sun-god,
and was regarded as the god of the burning sun of noon.
In Sumerian days, however, while he was still the spirit
of the fire, he had been necessarily the servant and
associate of En-lil; and when En-lil became the Semitic
Bel of Nippur, Nusku followed his fortunes and was
made his messenger. After this his identification with
Nebo was easy. Nebo, too, was the messenger and
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
interpreter of Bel, though it was the younger Bel of
Babylon who had supplanted the older Bel of Nippur.
As Bel-Merodach took the place of En-lil, so too did
Nebo take the place of Nusku. The priests of Babylon
knew of one Bel only, and the minister of Bel must be
one and the same whether his name were Nusku or
Nebo. That Nusku had originally been an independent
deity was, however, never forgotten. The past history
and religion of the country could not be ignored, and
the priesthood were forced to erect a separate shrine to
Nusku within the precincts of the temple of Nebo itself.
Only thus could they be certain that the god would not
avenge himself for being defrauded of his dues.
</p>

<p>
The history of Nebo is an instructive illustration of
the successive changes that passed over the religion of
Babylonia. We first have the ghost of Sumerian times,
who becomes the god of a special city in the days when
Semitic influence began to make itself felt. Then the
god is transformed into a Semitic Baal, and with the
political rise of the neighbouring city of Babylon is
degraded into an attendant and retainer of the mightier
god. As interpreter of the will of the culture-god he
deprives Ea of his ancient prerogatives, and his title of
<q>Prophet</q> becomes his name. Henceforth he is a
purely Semitic divinity, and a wife is found for him in
the shadowy abstraction <q>Hearing.</q> Under the influences
of the solar cult, he is identified with the ancient
Sumerian fire-spirit who had himself become a sun-god,
and eventually he is adopted in Assyria as the patron of
the learned class, and the divine representative of Babylonian
learning.
</p>

<p>
But the history of Nebo also illustrates one of the
directions in which the striving after a monotheistic
faith displayed itself. Not only was a separate god,
Nusku, amalgamated with Nebo, Nebo himself, while still
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
keeping his independent personality, sank into a subordinate
position which may be compared with that of
an archangel in Christian belief. Babylonian religion
came to distinguish between a limited number of <q>great
gods</q> and the inferior deities who formed their court.
Indeed, it went even further than this. From the days
of Khammurabi onward there was a tendency to exalt
Bel-Merodach at the expense of all his brother gods.
The development of Babylonian religion, in fact, went
hand in hand with that of the Babylonian State. The
foundation of an empire had made the Babylonian
familiar with the conception of a supreme sovereign,
under whom there were vassal kings, and under them
again a dependent nobility. The same conception was
extended to the celestial hierarchy. Here, too, Bel-Merodach
sat supreme, while the other gods <q>bowed
reverently before him,</q> retaining, indeed, their ancestral
rights and power within the limits of their respective
sanctuaries, but acknowledging the supremacy of the one
sovereign Bel. It was no longer in honour of En-lil that
the inhabitants of Babylonia were called <q>the people of
Bel,</q> but because they were all alike the children and
adorers of Bel of Babylon.
</p>

<p>
But Babylonian religion never advanced further. It
is true that the tablet published by Dr. Pinches, to
which I have already alluded in the last lecture, identifies
the chief gods of the pantheon with Merodach in his
various phases and functions; it is also true that
Nabonidos, the last Babylonian king, shocked the consciences
and violated the rights of the local priesthoods
by bringing the images of their gods into the central
sanctuary; but such speculations and efforts remained
isolated and without effect. It was otherwise, however,
in Assyria. There the deities for the most part, like the
culture and language, had been imported from the south;
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
there were no time-honoured temples and venerable
traditions to contend against; and, above all, there was a
national god who represented the State rather than a
Semitic Baal, and was therefore a symbol of the unity
which bound the State together.
</p>

<p>
The supreme god of Assyria was Assur; the other
gods were of Babylonian origin. And in the name of
Assur we have the name of the country itself and its
primitive capital. Assur, in short, was the deified city
of Assur, the divine State which from the days of its
successful revolt from Babylonia was predominantly
military, with all the union and discipline of a military
organisation. Such at least was the view taken of the
god in the historical age of Assyria, though some modern
scholars have doubted whether, like Nineveh, which
derived its name from the goddess Ninâ, it was not
originally rather the city that took its name from the
god than the god from the city.
</p>

<p>
Such doubts, however, are set at rest by an examination
of the proper names found in the Babylonian contracts
of the early Semitic period, more especially in
those of the age of Khammurabi. Many of them are
compounded with the names of cities which are treated
as deities, and are preceded by the prefix of divinity.
Thus we have Sumu-Upi (Bu. 91-5-9. 2182. 16), like
Ṡumu-Rakh or Sumu-Râ and Samuel, as well as Upi-rabi
(Bu. 91-5-9. 377. 25), where the deified Upi or
Opis plays exactly the same part as the deified rivers
Euphrates and Tigris in other similarly compounded
names. Between the deified city and the deified river
no distinction was drawn. Both alike were impersonations
of the god. So too in the second tablet of the
<hi rend='italic'>Surpu</hi> series (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 59. 35, 38), Eridu and Babylon
are invoked to deliver the sick man by the side of Ea
and Merodach and various other gods, as well as certain
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
of the stars. Between the ordinary gods of Babylonia
and the deified city no distinction is made.<note place='foot'>For names like Sippar-sadî, Sippar-saduni, Upê-semi, and Upê-natsir,
see Pinches, <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</hi>, xliii. p. 277.</note>
</p>

<p>
Had the city taken its name from the god, it would be
difficult to find a satisfactory etymology for it. The
spelling of the name is against our connecting it with
the word <foreign rend='italic'>asiru</foreign>, <q>he who blesses</q> or <q>consecrates,</q> from
which the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>asirtu</foreign>, <q>sanctuary,</q> is derived, like
the name of the Canaanitish goddess Ashêrah.<note place='foot'>Support may be found for this etymology in the common title of
Assur as <q>the good god,</q> which is written ideographically <foreign rend='italic'>an-dugga</foreign>.
But even if the Assyrians believed that this was the proper signification of
the name of their god, it does not follow that they were right; and since
the characters representing the title could be read <hi rend='smallcaps'>An-sar</hi>, it is possibly
only a play on the supposed connection of the name with the Sumerian
Ansar. The latter appears as Assoros in Damascius. Perhaps Assur
(originally Asur) is merely <foreign rend='italic'>asurru</foreign>, <q>a wall.</q></note> On the
other hand, the native Assyrian etymology is as inadmissible
as the endeavours of our eighteenth century
lexicographers to find Greek or Latin derivations for
Anglo-Saxon words. The Assyrian scribes saw in Assur
merely the old elemental deity Ansar, <q>the firmament,</q>
who was himself nothing more than the Sumerian spirit
of the <q>heavenly host.</q> It is wisest not to imitate
them, but, as in the case of Merodach and Istar, to leave
the origin of the name Assur unexplained.
</p>

<p>
The kings of Assyria were originally high priests of
Assur. In other parts of the Semitic world the high
priest similarly preceded the king. The father-in-law of
Moses was high priest of Midian, and the high priests of
Saba in Southern Arabia developed into kings.<note place='foot'>Glaser, <hi rend='italic'>Skizze der Geschichte Arabiens</hi> (1889), pp. 64-74.</note> There
were high priests also in Babylonia, who took their titles
not only from the gods they served, but also from the cities
over which they ruled. The peculiarity in the case of
Assyria, however, was that there the god and the city
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
were one and the same. When, therefore, the high priest
of Assur assumed the title of king, he still retained his
priestly functions under another title. He was priest,
but no longer high priest. Assyria was a monarchy, not
a theocracy; it was founded on military force, not on
priestly influence. The king accordingly was not a representative
and vicegerent of the god, like a Babylonian
prince; he represented the god Assur only because he
represented the city of Assur. It was through the city
of Assur that the god manifested himself as it were
to men.
</p>

<p>
One of the consequences of this fact was that Assur
was a national as opposed to a merely local god.
Wherever the power of the city extended, there the
power of the god necessarily extended as well. When
Assur became the capital of a kingdom, the whole land
which owned its authority received its name and accepted
the supremacy of its god. The local cults made way for
the national cults; it was not only in Assur itself that
the god had his temple; wherever a city called itself
Assyrian, the worship of Assur held the first place.
There were no old sanctuaries and cults to displace, as in
Babylonia; the deities who were adored in the cities of
Assyria were of Babylonian origin, like Ninâ and Istar;
and when once Assyria had achieved its independence,
and realised that it had a national life of its own, they
were unable to maintain themselves against the national
god.
</p>

<p>
This national god had given his people their freedom
and right to rule. He it was who had led their armies to
victory, and had vanquished the hostile deities of Babylonia.
He was thus identified with the army to which
Assyria owed its existence, and with the king who was
its leader in war. Wherever the army went or the king
established himself, Assur went also. He lost, therefore,
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
the last relics of his association with a particular locality,
and became the god of the whole people. From every
point of view he was national and not local.
</p>

<p>
Freed from the limitations of locality, he was consequently
freed from the limitations of form. Bel-Merodach
was necessarily human in form, with all the
limitations of humanity; it was only where his image
was that he could be present in visible shape. But
Assur was not confined to the human image that represented
him. He could also be represented by a
symbol, and where the symbol was he was too. The
symbol was a standard, on which an archer was depicted
rising from a winged sun. It was carried with the
armies of Assyria from place to place, like the ark in
which the Israelites of the age of Samuel saw a symbol of
the presence of their national God. The winged sun
refers us to Egypt; so too does the standard on which
the emblem of Assur was borne. The Asiatic conquests
of the Eighteenth Dynasty had brought Egypt and
Assyria into contact; the Assyrian king paid tribute to
the Pharaoh, and doubtless depended on him for support
against Babylonia. It was the period when Assyria was
first feeling itself an independent nation; the authority
of Babylonia had been shaken off, and the god of Babylon
had been supplanted by Assur. We need not be surprised,
therefore, if Assur consented to borrow from Egypt
the symbol which henceforth distinguished him from the
Babylonian gods, and with the symbol went the theological
ideas of which it was the expression.
</p>

<p>
These theological ideas were already deeply tinctured
by the theories of the solar cult. The winged solar
disc is evidence that Assur was assimilated to Amon-Ra
of Egypt. But the assimilation stopped there. The
Assyrians were too purely Semitic even to comprehend
the nebulous pantheism of the Egyptian solar school;
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
Assur remained an anthropomorphic god, with very
definite attributes and sharply-cut features. The archer
who rises above the disc of the sun significantly indicates
the contrast between the theology of Egypt and Assyria.
Above the sun-god is the human warrior, the lord of
hosts, the god of battles, the divine leader of the armies
of Assur. There was no room in the practical Assyrian
mind for a formless divinity, with its infinite transformations
and elusive shape. The Assyrian needed a soldier's
god, at once human and clearly defined.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless this human god was recognised as one
with the sun-god. Or rather, perhaps, the sun was
regarded as his visible manifestation, the mark or symbol
under which he displayed himself. Assur was thus
essentially a Semitic Baal, but a warlike Baal, who was
the god of a nation and not of a particular place.
</p>

<p>
Where the nation and its army were, accordingly,
their god was as well. And when Assyria claimed to
rule the whole civilised world, the power and authority of
its god became world-wide. It was in his name that the
Assyrian troops went forth to fight, and it was <q>through
trust in</q> him that they gained their victories. Those
who resisted them were his enemies, those who submitted
were incorporated into his empire, and became his subjects
and worshippers. All other gods had to yield to
him; he was not only paramount over them, but to
worship them instead of him was an act of impiety.
The sacrifice might continue to be made to them and the
prayer offered, but it was on condition that the first-fruits
of both sacrifice and prayer were given to Assur.
</p>

<p>
This, however, was not all. Assur was not only
jealous of other gods, there was no goddess who could
share with him his power. In the eyes of the Assyrian
people he was wifeless, like Yahveh of Israel or Chemosh
of Moab. It is true that some Assyriologists, with more
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
zeal than knowledge, have found for him a wife, but
they are not agreed as to who she was. Sometimes we
have been told it was Serua, sometimes Istar, sometimes
Belit. The very fact that such a difference of opinion
exists is sufficient to condemn the whole supposition.
It is based on the pedantry of certain of the Assyrian
scribes, who, educated in the literature and religion of
Babylonia, were naturally anxious to fit their national
god into the Babylonian system of theology. The gods
of Babylonia had each his wife; they were each the
head of a divine family, and consequently the chief god
of Assyria must be the same. But it was difficult to
find for him a female consort. Once or twice the help
of the grammar is invoked, and the feminine Assurit is
made to take her place by the side of Assur. But she
was too evidently an artificial creation, and accordingly
Belit was borrowed from Bel-Merodach, or Nin-lil from
Bel of Nippur, and boldly claimed as the wife of Assur.
But this too was acceptable neither to Babylonians nor
to Assyrians, and, as a last resource, Istar, the virgin
goddess, was transformed into a married wife. It might
have been thought that the idea, once started, would
have met with ready acceptance; for Istar was the
goddess of Nineveh, as Assur was of the older capital
which was superseded by Nineveh in the later days of
the Assyrian empire. That it did not do so is a proof
how firmly rooted was the wifelessness of Assur in the
Assyrian mind; he was no Babylonian Bel who needed
a helpmeet, but a warrior's god, who entered the battle
wifeless and alone.
</p>

<p>
I can but repeat again of him what I said years ago
in my Hibbert Lectures: <q>Assur consequently differs
from the Babylonian gods, not only in the less narrowly
local character that belongs to him, but also in his
solitary nature. He is <q>king of all the gods</q> in a sense
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
in which none of the deities of Babylonia were. He is
like the king of Assyria himself, brooking no rival,
allowing neither wife nor son to share in the honours
which he claims for himself alone. He is essentially
a jealous god, and as such sends forth his Assyrian
adorers to destroy his unbelieving foes. Wifeless, childless,
he is mightier than the Babylonian Baalim; less
kindly, perhaps, less near to his worshippers than they
were, but more awe-inspiring and more powerful. We
can, in fact, trace in him all the lineaments upon which,
under other conditions, there might have been built up
as pure a faith as that of the God of Israel.</q> That none
such was ever built, may be accepted as a sign and token
that between the Semites of Assyria and those of Israel
there lay a difference which no theories of evolution are
able to explain.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VI. Cosmologies.</head>

<p>
Man was made in the likeness of the gods, and, conversely,
the gods are in the likeness of man. This belief lies at
the root of the theology of Semitic Babylonia, and
characterises its conception of divinity. It follows
from it that the world which we see has come into
existence like the successive generations of mankind or
the products of human art. It has either been begotten
by the creator, or it has been formed out of pre-existing
materials. It did not come into being of itself; it is no
fortuitous concurrence of atoms; no self-evolved product
out of nothing, or the result of continuous development
and evolution. The doctrines of spontaneous
generation and of development are alike foreign to
Babylonian religious thought. That demanded a creator
who was human in his attributes and mode of work, who
could even make mistakes and experiments, and so call
into existence imperfect or monstrous forms which
further experience was needed to rectify. There was
an earlier as well as a later creation, the unshapely brood
of chaos as well as the more perfect creations of the gods
of light.
</p>

<p>
As we have seen, the culture of primitive Babylonia
radiated from two main centres, the sanctuary of
Nippur in the north, and the seaport of Eridu in the
south. The one was inland, the other maritime; and
what I may term the geographical setting of the two
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
streams of culture varied accordingly. The great temple
of Nippur was known as Ê-kur, <q>the house of the
mountain-land</q>; it was a model of the earth, which
those who built it believed to be similarly shaped, and
to have the form of a mountain whose peak penetrated
the clouds. Its supreme god was the lord of the nether
earth, his subjects were the demons of the underworld,
and the theology of his priests was associated with
sorcery and witchcraft, and with invocations to the
spirits who ruled over the world of the dead.
</p>

<p>
Eridu, on the contrary, was the dwelling-place of the
god of the deep. Its temple, Ê-Saggila, <q>the house of
the high head,</q> was, we are told, <q>in the midst</q> of the
encircling ocean on which the whole earth rested, and in
it was the home of Ea, <q>the lord of the holy mound.</q><note place='foot'>Du-azagga. As the <q>holy mound</q> was the home of Ea, it follows
that it was originally part of the Persian Gulf; on the other hand, the
name given to it implies that it resembled a mountain lifting itself up
into the sky. The sun rose from it (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 50. 5<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>); hence it must
have been the eastern horizon, which, to an inhabitant of Eridu, would
have been the horizon of the sea, that ascended towards the heavens like
a great mound. A model was made of it, which became the <foreign rend='italic'>parakku</foreign>
or mercy-seat of Ea in his temple at Eridu. When Eridu and its god
were supplanted by Babylon and Bel-Merodach, the Du-azagga was transferred
to the latter city and became <q>the seat of the oracles</q> in the
shrine of Bel-Merodach, <q>whereon,</q> according to Nebuchadrezzar, <q>at
the festival of Zagmuku, at the beginning of the year, on the 8th and
11th days, the king of the gods of heaven and earth, Bel, the god, seats
himself, while the gods of heaven and earth reverently regard him,
standing before him with bowed heads.</q> When Nebo became the
minister of Merodach, he too was addressed as <q>the god of the holy
mound</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 54. 71), and one of <q>the three great names of Anu</q>
was said to be <q>the king who comes forth from the holy mound,</q>
another of the names being <q>the creator of the heavenly hosts</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi>
iii. 68. 19, 20). Even Istar, or rather Iskhara, is called <q>the goddess
of the holy mound</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iii. 68. 27). It may be added that a lexical
tablet makes the <q>holy mound</q> a synonym of the deep (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 41,
No. 1).</note>
Its god was the author of Babylonian writing and
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
civilisation, and his son and interpreter was Aṡari, <q>the
benefactor of man.</q> While the theology of Nippur
concerned itself with the dead, that of Eridu was pre-eminently
occupied with the living. Asari is invoked
as the god who raised the dead to life, and the arts
which make life pleasant were the gifts of Ea himself.
It is perhaps not without reason that, while En-lil of
Nippur appears as the destroyer of mankind, Ea is their
creator and instructor. He not only created them, but
he taught them how to live, and provided for them the
spells and remedies which could heal the sick and ward
off death.
</p>

<p>
Like Khnum of Egypt, he was called <q>the potter,</q>
for he had moulded mankind from the clay which his
waters formed on the shores of the Persian Gulf.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 58. 57. His Sumerian title as the divine potter was Nunurra,
which is explained as <q>god of the pot,</q> or more literally <q>lord
of the pot</q> (Brünnow, <hi rend='italic'>Classified List</hi>, 5895). See Scheil, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de
Travaux</hi>, xx. p. 125.</note> Nor
was it mankind only that was thus made. The whole
world of created things had been similarly moulded; the
earth and all that dwelt upon it had risen out of the
sea. The cosmology of Eridu thus made water the
origin of all things; the world we inhabit has sprung
from the deep, which still encircles it like a serpent with
its coils.
</p>

<p>
But the deep over which the creator-god presided
was a deep which formed part of that orderly framework
of nature wherein the gods of light bear rule, and
which obeys laws that may not be broken. It is not
the deep where the spirit of chaos held sway, and of
which she was an impersonation; that was a deep
without limits or law, whose only progeny was a brood
of monsters. Between the deep of Ea and the chaos of
Tiamât the cosmology of historical Babylonia drew a
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
sharp line of distinction; the one excluded the other,
and it was not until the deep of Tiamât had been, as it
were, overcome and placed within bounds, that the deep
wherein Ea dwelt was able to take its place.
</p>

<p>
The two conceptions are antagonistic one to the other,
and can hardly be explained, except on the supposition
that they belong to two different schools of thought.
The brood of Tiamât, it must be remembered, were once
the subjects of En-lil of Nippur, and the Anunna-ki, or
<q>spirits of the earth,</q> though they became the orderly
ministers of the gods of light, nevertheless continued to
have their dwelling-place in the underground world, and
to serve its mistress Allat. The motley host that
followed Tiamât in her contest with Bel-Merodach were
essentially the ghosts and goblins of the theology of
Nippur; and it is with the latter, therefore, that we must
associate the theory of the divine world with which they
are connected. The world of Nippur was a world from
which the sea was excluded; it was a world of plain and
mountain, and of the hollow depths which lay beneath
the surface of the earth. The cosmology of Nippur
would naturally concern itself with the land rather than
with the sea; the earth and not the water would have
been the first in order of existence, and habitation of
the gods would be sought on the summit of a Mount
Olympus rather than in the depths of an encircling
ocean.<note place='foot'>El-lil, it should be noted, was called <q>the great mountain</q> (Kur-gal,
Sadu-rabu in Semitic), and the name of his temple was Ê-kur, <q>the
house of the mountain.</q> It is probable that the belief in the Kharsag-kurkurra,
or <q>mountain of the world,</q> on which the gods lived, originated
at Nippur. From Isa. xiv. 13 we gather that it was placed in the north.
Nin-lil, the wife of En-lil, is called Nin-kharsag, <q>the lady of the
mountain,</q> by Samsu-iluna, who describes her as <q>the mother who
created me</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Brit. Mus.</hi>, pl. 199, 1. 41).</note>
</p>

<p>
In the chaos of Tiamât, accordingly, I see the last
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
relics of a cosmology which emanated from Nippur, and
was accepted wherever the influence of Nippur prevailed.
It has been modified by the cosmological ideas of Eridu;
and in the story of the struggle between Tiamât and
Merodach an attempt has been made to harmonise the
two conflicting conceptions of the universe, and to weld
them into a compact whole. The world of Tiamât has
first been transformed into a watery abyss like that
which the theologians of Eridu believed to be the origin
of the universe, and then has been absorbed by the deep
over which Ea held sway. The creator Ea has taken the
place of the spirit of destruction, the culture-god of the
dragon of darkness.
</p>

<p>
But a curious legend, which has been much misunderstood,
still preserves traces of the old cosmology of the
great sanctuary of Northern Babylonia. It describes the
war made against a king of Babylonia by the powers of
darkness, the gnome-like beings who dwelt <q>in the
ground,</q> where Tiamât had suckled them, and where
they had multiplied in the cavernous depths of a mountain
land. They were, we are told, composite monsters,
<q>warriors with the bodies of birds, men with the faces
of ravens,</q> over whom ruled a king and his wife and
their seven sons.<note place='foot'>These are the creatures described by Berossos as sprung from the
bosom of Tiamât&mdash;winged men, with four or two faces, or with the feet of
horses and goats; human-headed bulls; dog-headed horses, and the like&mdash;which
were depicted on the walls of the temple of Bel-Merodach, the
successor of Bel of Nippur (Syncell. p. 29; Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Chron. Armen.</hi> p. 10,
ed. Mai).</note> Year after year the war continued,
and, in spite of charms and incantations, host after host
sent forth from Akkad was annihilated by the unclean
and superhuman enemy. The Babylonian king was in
despair; in vain he appealed to the gods, and declared
how <q>terror and night, death and plague, earthquake,
fear and horror, hunger, famine, and destruction,</q> had
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
come upon his unfortunate people. <q>The plain of
Akkad</q> seemed about to become the prey of the demons
of the night. How it was rescued from the danger that
threatened it we do not know; the story is unfortunately
broken, and the end of it has not been found. But the
origin and character of the superhuman enemy is not
difficult to discover; their dwelling-place is in the tomb-like
recesses of the mountains, their mother was Tiamât
herself, and they have the monstrous shapes of the ghosts
and spirits of the ancient animism of Nippur.<note place='foot'>A variant fragment of the legend, as was first recognised by myself in
the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi> xx. pp. 187-189, was published by Dr. Scheil from an
early Babylonian tablet in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi>, xx. pp. 66, 67.</note>
</p>

<p>
The legend was fitly preserved in the sanctuary of
Nergal, the god of the dead, at Kutha. It too has
undergone the harmonising process of later times: the
cosmologies of Nippur and Eridu are again set in antagonism,
one against the other, and there is a first creation
as well as a second engaged in the same struggle
as that which under a different form is described in the
legends of Eridu and Babylon. But the antagonists in
it are alike the inhabitants of the dry land; there is
no watery abyss from which they have sprung, whether
it be the chaotic deep of Tiamât or the ocean home of
the god of culture. The conceptions on which it rests
belong to the inland plain of Babylonia rather than to
the shores of the sea. Influenced though it has been by
the cosmology of Eridu, the elements of which it is composed
go back to an inland and not to a maritime
State.
</p>

<p>
It will be seen that our knowledge of the cosmology
of Nippur is still scanty and uncertain. The world
which it presupposed had the form of a mountain, on
the peak of which the gods lived among the clouds of
heaven, while the cavernous depths below it were peopled
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
with hosts of spirits and demons, the shades of the dead
and the ghosts of a primitive animism. There was no
encircling ocean, no abysmal deep on which it floated,
and from which it had been produced. What its origin,
however, was believed to be we do not yet know, or to
what creative <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Lil</foreign> it was held to owe its existence.
For an answer to these questions we must wait until the
ancient libraries of Nippur have been thoroughly excavated
and explored.<note place='foot'>An indication may, however, be found in the statement that the
Lillum or <q>Lil</q> was the <q>mother-father</q> of En-lil (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 27. 5),
and the further reference to the Zi or <q>spirit</q> who was the <q>mother-father</q>
of En-lil and Nin-lil (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 1. Col. ii. 25-28). The
genderless Sumerian knew of no distinction of sex; the creative
principle was at once female and male. It will be noticed that the
female element takes precedence of the male in contradistinction to
Semitic ideas.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is otherwise with the cosmology of Eridu. We
know a good deal about it, thanks to the theologians of
Babylon, whose god Merodach was the successor and
representative of the god of Eridu. It is true that its
form has been changed and modified in part for the
greater glory of Merodach and his city, that Merodach
has even taken the place of Ea as the creator, and that
the cosmology of Nippur&mdash;or at all events of a similar
school of thought&mdash;has been combined with that of
Eridu, with the result that there are two creations,
the first chaotic, and the second that of the present
world. But it is still easy to disentangle the
earlier from the later elements in the story, and to
separate what is purely Babylonian from what belongs
to Eridu.
</p>

<p>
One of the versions of the story that have come down
to us has been preserved in a spell, of which, like verses
of the Bible in modern times, it has been used to form a
part. Its antiquity is shown by the fact that it is
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
written in the ancient language of Sumer. It is thus
that it begins&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>No holy house, no house of the gods in a holy place had as yet been built,</q></l>
<l>no reed had grown, no tree been planted,</l>
<l>no bricks had been made, no structure formed,</l>
<l>no house had been built, no city founded,</l>
<l>no city built where living things could dwell.</l>
<l>Nippur was unbuilt, its temple of Ê-kur was unerected;</l>
<l>Erech was unbuilt, its temple of Ê-ana was unerected;<note place='foot'>These two lines are an interpolation.</note></l>
<l>the deep sea was uncreated, Eridu unbuilt.</l>
<l>The site of (its) holy house, the house of the gods, existed not,</l>
<l>all the earth was sea,</l>
<l>while in the midst of the sea was a water-course.</l>
<l>In those days was Eridu built and the temple of Ê-Saggil founded,</l>
<l>Ê-Saggil wherein dwells the divine king of the holy mound in the midst of the deep;&mdash;</l>
<l>Babylon was built, Ê-Saggil completed;&mdash;</l>
<l>the spirits of the earth were created together,</l>
<l>they called it by the mighty name of the holy city, the seat of their well-being.<note place='foot'>These three lines have been interpolated.</note></l>
<l>Merodach<note place='foot'>The name of Merodach has been substituted for that of Ea.</note> tied (reeds) together to form a weir in the water,</l>
<l>he made dust and mixed it with the reeds of the weir,</l>
<l>that the gods might dwell in the seat of (their) well-being.<note place='foot'>A play on the name of Eri-dugga, <q>the good city.</q></note></l>
<l>Mankind he created,&mdash;</l>
<l>the goddess Aruru created the seed of mankind with him,<note place='foot'>Probably an interpolation.</note>&mdash;</l>
<l>the cattle of the field, the living creatures in the field, he created;</l>
<l>the Tigris and Euphrates he made, and set them in their place,</l>
<l>giving them good names.</l>
<l>Moss and seed-plant of the marsh, reed and rush he created,</l>
<l>he created the green herb of the field,</l>
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
<l>the earth, the marsh, the jungle,</l>
<l>the cow and its young, the calf, the sheep and its young, the lamb of the fold,</l>
<l>the grove and the forest,</l>
<l>the goat, (and) the gazelle multiplied (?) for him.</l>
<l>Bel-Merodach<note place='foot'>Originally Ea.</note> filled a space at the edge of the sea,</l>
<l>[there] he made an enclosure of reeds,</l>
<l>he constructed [a site?],</l>
<l>he created [the reeds], he created the trees,</l>
<l>he laid [a platform] in the place,</l>
<l>[he moulded bricks], the structure he formed;</l>
<l>[he built houses], he founded cities,</l>
<l>[cities he founded and] filled them with living things;</l>
<l>Nippur he built, Ê-kur he erected,</l>
<l>Erech he built, Ê-ana he erected,<note place='foot'>These two lines do not belong to the original poem.</note></l>
<l><q rend='post'>[the deep he created, Eridu he built].</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It is evident that the poem was written by one who
lived on the marshy shores of the Persian Gulf, and had
watched how land could be formed by tying the reeds
in bundles and building with them a weir. It was in
this way that the first cultivators of Eridu protected
their fields from the tide, or reclaimed the land from the
sea. None but those who had actually seen the process
could have devised a cosmology which thus applied it to
the creation of the world. To the question&mdash;<q>How did
this world come into existence?</q> the primitive inhabitant
of Eridu seemed to have a ready answer: he too
was able to create new land, out of which the rush and
the herb could grow, where the cattle could be pastured,
and the house built. What he could do, the gods had
doubtless done at the beginning of time; all things must
have come from the primeval deep, and the earth itself
was but an islet rescued from the tides and created by
obstructing their ebb and flow.
</p>

<p>
But it is also evident that the old poem has been
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
revised and re-edited by the priesthood of Babylon.
Ê-Saggil, the temple of Bel-Merodach of Babylon, has
been confounded with the earlier Ê-Saggil of Eridu, and
the creator-god Ea has been supplanted by Merodach.
The supplanter, however, cannot conceal his foreign
origin. The <q>enclosure</q> or <q>dwelling-place,</q> <q>at the
edge of the sea,</q> must have been made in the first
instance by the god of the deep, not by the sun-god of
Babylon. Merodach had nothing to do with the sea
and marshland, with cities that stood on the margin of
the ocean, or reeds that grew by its shores. He was the
god of an inland city, and he symbolised the sun and
not the sea.
</p>

<p>
It is possible that even before its alteration at the
hands of the theologians of Babylon, the old cosmological
poem of Eridu had been modified in accordance
with the requirements of a theology which resulted from
a fusion of Sumerian and Semitic ideas. The doctrine
of the triad is already presupposed by it; Nippur,
Erech, and Eridu, with their sanctuaries of Bel, Anu,
and Ea, already represent Babylonia, and the temples of
Bel and Anu even take precedence of that of Ea. At
the same time the parallelism between Nippur and Erech
on the one side, and Eridu on the other, is imperfect.
The uncreated <q>deep,</q> on the margin of which Eridu
stood, has nothing corresponding with it in the two preceding
lines, while the place of the temples of Nippur
and Erech is occupied by the name of the city of Eridu.
It seems clear, that the reference to the two great
sanctuary-cities of Northern and Central Babylonia is
an interpolation, which breaks and injures the sense.
Originally, we may conclude, the poem named Eridu
only; its author knew nothing of the other shrines of
Babylonia; for him the temple of Ea at Eridu was the
house of all <q>the gods.</q>
</p>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<p>
Ea, under the mask of Merodach, is the creator of
mankind, as of all things else. In this act of creation
the goddess Aruru is coupled with him; we have no
materials at present for explaining why she should have
been introduced, or whether the introduction formed
part of the original legend. It is not the only passage,
however, in which she appears as a creatress. According
to the Epic of Gilgames, she had created the great hero
of Babylonia, and it was she also who moulded Ea-bani,
the companion of Gilgames, out of clay which she had
kneaded with her hands. Like Ea, therefore, she was a
modeller in clay, and there was good reason for associating
her with the divine potter who had made man.
Had she been a god she would doubtless have been
identified with him; as it was, she had to remain his
companion and associate, whose name could not be forgotten
even by a worshipper of Ea. Probably she was
the goddess of some Babylonian city where she played
the part that Ea played at Eridu; it may be that her
sanctuary was at Marad, which claimed, as it would
seem, to be the birthplace of Gilgames.
</p>

<p>
The name of the first man was Adapa, <q>the son of
Eridu.</q> Ea had created him without a helpmeet; he
had endowed him with wisdom and knowledge, but had
denied to him the gift of immortality. Each day he
baked the bread and poured pure water into the bowl;
at night he drew the bolts of the gates of Eridu, and at
dawn he sailed forth in his bark to fish in the waters of
the Persian Gulf. Once, so the story ran, the south
wind upset his skiff, and in revenge he broke its wings.
But the south wind was a servant of Anu, and the god of
the sky demanded the punishment of the daring mortal.
Ea, however, intervened to save the man he had created.
He clad Adapa in a mourner's robe, and showed him the
road to heaven, telling him what he was to do in the
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
realm of Anu, but forbidding him to eat or drink there.
The gate of heaven was guarded by the gods Tammuz
and Nin-gis-zida, who asked him the meaning of the
mourner's garment which he wore.<note place='foot'>For Tammuz and Nin-gis-zida, see above, p. <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, note. It may be
added that in the Maqlû collection of incantation texts, Nin-gis-zida
seems to be regarded as a goddess and the consort of Nusku, the fire-god.
Nin, in Sumerian, more often signified <q>lady</q> than <q>lord.</q> It is possible
that at Eridu she was held to be the wife of Tammuz.</note> When he answered
that it was for their own selves, because they had vanished
from the earth, their hearts were softened, and they
became his intercessors with Anu. Anu listened, and
forgave; but that a mortal man should behold the secrets
of heaven and earth was so contrary to right, that he
ordered the food and water of life to be offered him.
Adapa, however, remembered the commands of Ea, and,
unlike the biblical Adam, refused the food of immortality.
Man remained mortal, and it was never again
in his power to eat of the tree of life. But in return,
sovereignty and dominion were bestowed upon him, and
Adapa became the father of mankind.
</p>

<p>
The legend is a Babylonian attempt to explain the
existence of death. It is like, and yet unlike, the story
in Genesis. The biblical Adam lost the gift of immortality
because his desire to become as God, knowing
good and evil, had caused him to be driven from the
Paradise in which grew the tree of life. Adapa, on the
other hand, was already endowed with knowledge by his
creator Ea, and his loss of immortality was due, not to
his disobedience, but to his obedience to the commands
of the god. Adam was banished from the Garden of
Eden, <q>lest he should put forth his hand and take of
the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever</q>; while in the
Babylonian legend it was Anu himself who was reluctant
that one who had entered the gate of heaven should
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
remain a mere mortal man. Babylonian polytheism
allowed the existence of divided counsels among the
gods; the monotheism of Israel made this impossible.
There was no second Yahveh to act in contradiction to
the first; Yahveh was at once the creator of man and
the God of heaven, and there was none to dispute His
will. There is no room for Anu in the Book of Genesis;
and as Ea, the creator of Adapa, was unwilling that the
man he had created should become an immortal god, so
Yahveh, the creator of Adam, similarly denied to him
the food of immortal life.
</p>

<p>
That there is a connection between the Biblical story
and the Babylonian legend is, however, rendered certain
by the geography of the Biblical Paradise. It was a
garden in the land of Eden, and Edin was the Sumerian
name of the <q>plain</q> of Babylonia in which Eridu
stood. Two of the rivers which watered it were the
Tigris and Euphrates, the two streams, in fact, which we
are specially told had been created and named by Ea at
the beginning of time. Indeed, the name that is given
to the Tigris in the Book of Genesis is its old Sumerian
title, which survived in later days only in the religious
literature. Even the strange statement that <q>a river
went out of Eden,</q> which <q>was parted and became
into four heads,</q> is explained by the cuneiform texts.
The Persian Gulf was called <q>the Salt River,</q> and,
thanks to its tides, was regarded as the source of the
four streams which flowed into it from their <q>heads</q>
or springs in the north. On early Babylonian seals, Ea,
the god of the sea, is depicted as pouring sometimes the
four rivers, sometimes only the Tigris and Euphrates,
from a vase that he holds in his hands. Years ago I
drew attention to a Sumerian hymn in which reference
is made to the garden and sacred tree of Eridu, the
Babylonian Paradise in the plain of Eden. Dr. Pinches
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
has since discovered the last line of the hymn, in which
the picture is completed by a mention of the rivers
which watered the garden on either side. It is thus that
the text reads&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>In Eridu a vine<note place='foot'>Perhaps Hommel is right in translating <q>palm.</q></note> grew over-shadowing; in a holy place was it brought forth;</q></l>
<l>its root was of bright lapis, set in the world beneath.</l>
<l>The path of Ea was in Eridu,<note place='foot'>Cp. Gen. iii. 8.</note> teeming with fertility.</l>
<l>His seat (there) is the centre of the earth;</l>
<l>his couch is the bed of the primeval mother.<note place='foot'>Zikum or Nammu, the abyss, who is called the mother of Ea.
Nammu is given as the Sumerian name or title of Zikum in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform
Texts</hi>, xii. p. 26, 1. 20.</note></l>
<l>Into the heart of its holy house, which spreads its shade like a forest, hath no man entered.</l>
<l>In its midst is Tammuz,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>between the mouths of the rivers on both sides.</q><note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, p. 238, and Pinches, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Victoria
Institute</hi>, xxix. p. 44.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The sacred tree of the garden of Eridu was, however,
not the tree of life. It was rather the tree of knowledge.
This is shown by an inscription of Eri-Aku or Arioch,
in which he describes himself as <q>the executor of the
oracle of the sacred tree of Eridu.</q> Perhaps it is to the
same tree that reference is made in a magical text, in
which a man possessed of <q>the seven evil spirits</q> is
healed with the help of <q>the tree which shatters the
power of the incubus, and upon whose core the name of
Ea is recorded.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 15, Col. ii. 5, 6.</note> But Ea was not only the god of
wisdom, he was also the god of <q>life,</q> and the trees of
both wisdom and life might therefore be fitly placed
under his protection.
</p>

<p>
When Babylon became the supreme head of Babylonia
under Khammurabi and his successors, the creative functions
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
of Ea were usurped by Merodach. A long poem
celebrating the glories and power of Merodach, his
struggle with chaos and creation of the world, and,
finally, his formal investiture with the names and prerogatives
of Ea, has been preserved to us in part. Ever
since its discovery by Mr. George Smith it has been
known as the Epic of the Creation, and the parallelism
between the first tablet composing it and the first
chapter of Genesis has long attracted attention. But
the poem is of late date. It belongs to an age of
religious syncretism and materialistic philosophy; the
mythological beings of popular belief are resolved into
cosmological principles, and the mythological dress in
which they appear has a theatrical effect. The whole
poem reminds us of the stilted and soulless productions
of the eighteenth century, in which commonplace ideas
and a prosaic philosophy masquerade as Greek nymphs
or Roman gods. It is only here and there, as in the
description of the contest with Tiamât, or in the concluding
lines,&mdash;if, indeed, they belong to the poem at all,&mdash;that
it rises above the level of dull mediocrity.
</p>

<p>
But mediocre as it may be from a literary point of
view, it is of considerable value to the student of Babylonian
cosmology. The author is fortunately not original,
and his materials, therefore, have been drawn from the
folk-lore or the theology of the past. A welcome
commentary on the first tablet has been preserved,
moreover, in the <hi rend='italic'>Problems and Solutions of First
Principles</hi>, written by the philosopher Damascius, the
contemporary of Justinian, whose accuracy and acquaintance
with Babylonian sources it proves. Unfortunately
the tablet is broken, and the final lines of it are consequently
lost&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>When above unnamed was the heaven,</q></l>
<l>the earth below by a name was uncalled,</l>
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
<l>the primeval deep was their begetter,</l>
<l>the chaos of Tiamât was the mother of them all.</l>
<l>Their waters were embosomed in one place,</l>
<l>the corn-stalk was ungathered, the marsh-plant ungrown.</l>
<l>At that time the gods had not appeared, any one of them,</l>
<l>by no name were they called, no destiny [had they fixed].</l>
<l>Then were the [primeval] gods created,</l>
<l>Lakhmu and Lakhamu came forth [the first].</l>
<l>Until they grew up ...</l>
<l>Ansar and Kisar were created ...</l>
<l>Long were the days ...</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Anu [Bel and Ea were made].</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To the Babylonian, name and existence were one and
the same. Nothing could exist unless it had a name,
and whatever had a name necessarily existed. That the
heaven and earth were unnamed, therefore, was equivalent
to saying that they were not yet in being. The words
with which the Book of Genesis begins are a curious
contradiction of the statement of the Babylonian cosmologist.
But the contradiction illustrates the difference
between the Hebrew and the Babylonian points of view.
The Hebrew was not only a monotheist; he believed
also that everything, even from the beginning, had been
made by the one supreme God; the Babylonian, on the
contrary, started with a materialistic philosophy. There
are no gods at the outset; the gods themselves have
been created like other things; all that existed at first
was a chaos of waters. The Babylonian cosmology is
that of Genesis without the first verse.
</p>

<p>
The word I have rendered <q>chaos</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>mummu</foreign>.
Damascius explains it as νοητὸς κόσμος, <q>the world of
thought</q> or <q>ideas.</q> It is a world which has as yet no
outward form or content, a world without matter, or
perhaps more probably a world in which matter is
inseparable from thought. And for this reason it is
formless; matter as yet had assumed no shape, there is
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
no single part of it which is so defined and separated
from the rest as to receive a name and thereby to exist.
There is nothing but a dark and formless deep, which
can be imagined but not pictured or described.
</p>

<p>
The chaos, however, is a chaos of waters. Once
more, therefore, we are taken back to Eridu and the
shores of the Persian Gulf, and to the cosmology which
saw in the water the origin of all things. But the
cosmology itself has been strangely changed. There is
no longer a creator god, no longer an Ea, who, like
Yahveh, existed before creation, and to whom the earth
and its inhabitants owe their existence. He has been
swept aside, and an atheistic philosophy has taken his
place. The mythological garb of the larger part of the
poem cannot disguise the materialism of its preface; in
the later tablets of it Tiamât may once more be the
dragon of popular imagination, but the first tablet is
careful to explain that this is but an adaptation to
folk-lore and legend, and that Tiamât is really what her
name signifies, the chaos of waters.
</p>

<p>
The process of creation is conceived of under the
Semitic form of generation. The Deep and the chaos of
waters become male and female principles, from whom
other pairs are generated. The process of generation
easily passed into the emanation of the Gnostic systems
of theosophy under the influence of Greek metaphysics.
But the poet of Babylon remained true to his Semitic
point of view; for him creation is a process of generation
rather than of emanation; and though the divine or
superhuman beings of the old mythology have become
mere primordial elements, they are still male and female,
begetting children like men and gods.
</p>

<p>
To find the elemental deities or principles that could
thus form links in the chain of evolution, it was necessary
to fall back on the spirits or ghosts of the early
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
Sumerian cult who were essentially material in their
nature, and had nothing in common with the Semitic
Baal. Lakhmu and his consort were part of the
monstrous brood of Tiamât; they represented the first
attempts to give form and substance to the universe.
But the form was still chaotic and immature, suitably
symbolised by beings, half human and half bestial, which
had descended to Semitic Babylonia from Sumerian animism,
and whose memory was kept alive by religious art.
</p>

<p>
Lakhmu and Lakhamu were followed by An-sar and
Ki-sar, the upper and lower firmament. The one
originally denoted the spirit-world of the sky, the other
the spirit-world of the earth.<note place='foot'>So in <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 25. 49, <foreign rend='italic'>an-sar ki-sar</foreign> is translated <q>the hosts of
heaven and earth.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 43. 27, the Sumerian <q>the divine
scribe, the creator of the hosts of earth,</q> is paraphrased by the Semitic
translator <foreign rend='italic'>Nabû pakid kissat samê u irtsiti</foreign>, <q>Nebo, the captain of the
hosts of heaven and earth.</q> For the Semite, the god he worshipped
was lord of the hosts of heaven as well as of the spirits of the
earth.</note> They were not gods in
the Semitic sense of the term. But the Babylonian
theologians transformed them into abstractions, or rather
into Platonic archetypes of the heaven and earth. Their
appearance meant that the world had at last taken form
and substance; the reign of chaos was over, and limits
had been set which should never again be overpassed.
The earth and the sky bounded and defined one another;
the age of formlessness was ended, and an orderly
universe was being prepared fit to receive the present
creation.
</p>

<p>
But the work of preparation was a long one, and not
until it was finished could the gods of Semitic Babylonia
be born. But even they have ceased to be gods for the
philosophic cosmologist. They are replaced and represented
by the triad of Anu, Bel, and Ea, who thus become
mere symbols of the sky, the earth, and the water, the
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
elements which Babylonian philosophy regarded as constituting
the present world. Doubtless, did we possess
the rest of the tablet, we should read how the other
<q>great gods</q> were sprung from them.
</p>

<p>
The later tablets of the Epic, which are devoted to
the glorification of Merodach, are for the most part of
little interest for the cosmologist. They describe at
wearisome length and with tedious reiteration the challenge
of Tiamât to the gods, the arming of Merodach,
and his victory over the dragon. Religions and mythological
conceptions of all kinds have been laid under
contribution, and confusedly mingled together. It was
necessary that Merodach, the supreme god of Babylon,
should have been the creator of the world; and it was
therefore also necessary that the creative acts of the
other creator gods of Babylonia should be transferred to
him, however diverse they may have been. Hence, in
the course of the poem, Merodach is described as destroying
and creating by his word alone,&mdash;a cosmological
conception which reminds us of that of the Egyptian
school of Hermopolis, while after the destruction of
Tiamât he is said to have cut her in half like a flat fish,
forming the canopy of heaven with one half, above which
the <q>fountains of the great deep</q> were kept firmly barred.
This is in flagrant contradiction with the cosmogony of
the Introduction, but it is probable that it was derived
from Nippur, where En-lil was perhaps described as
creating the heavens and earth in a similar fashion.
When the creative functions of En-lil were usurped by
Merodach, the old myth was transferred to the god of
Babylon; and accordingly, in the pæan which seems to
form the end of the Epic, Bel of Nippur is declared to
have bestowed upon Merodach his name of <q>lord of the
earth,</q> and therewith the powers and functions which
accompanied it.
</p>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<p>
The struggle between Tiamât, the dragon of darkness,
and Merodach, the god of light, must originally have
symbolised the dispersion of the black rain-cloud and
raging tempest by the rays of the sun. But the author
of the poem evidently regards it from a cosmological
point of view. For him it is the victory of order over
chaos, of the present creation over the formless world of
the past, and of fixed law over anarchy and confusion.
The conception of a law, governing the universe and
unable to be broken, lay deep in the Babylonian mind.
Even the gods could not escape it; they too had to
submit to that inexorable destiny which distinguished
the world in which we live from the world of chaos.
All they could do was to interpret and reveal the decrees
of fate; the decrees themselves were unalterable. It
was not Bel who issued them; they were contained in
the tablets of destiny which he wore on his breast as the
symbol of his supremacy, and which enabled him to
predict the future. These were, indeed, the Urim and
Thummim which, like the high priest of Israel, he was
privileged to consult.<note place='foot'>It is possible that the Hebrew Urim and Thummim were really connected
with the Babylonian <q>tablets of destiny.</q> The latter were
fastened <q>on the breast,</q> according to the Epic of the Creation, like the
Urim and Thummim of the Israelitish high priest. In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 18,
No. 3, Ea describes a sort of magical breastplate, made of gold, which
was to be set with precious stones and fastened to the breast. Nine
stones are named, which seem to have been carved into figures of the
gods, like Egyptian amulets, since they are said to be <q>the flesh of the
gods.</q> Professor Zimmern even suggests (<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
babylonischen Religion</hi>, p. 91) that Urim is to be identified with the
Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>urtu</foreign>, a synonym of <foreign rend='italic'>tertu</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>tôrâh</foreign>), <q>instruction</q> or <q>law.</q></note> What they did was not to make
him the arbiter of fortune, but its interpreter and seer.
He learned from them how the laws of the universe were
going to work, what destiny had in store for it, and how,
therefore, it was needful to act. It does not even seem
that his prevision extended beyond a year; at all events,
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
when Bel of Nippur had yielded up his rights to Bel of
Babylon, we are told that the latter had to sit each New
Year's day in the mystic <q>chamber of the fates,</q> determining
the destiny of mankind during the ensuing year.
</p>

<p>
The victory over Tiamât was followed by the assignment
of particular posts in the sky to Anu, Bel, and Ea.
This again harmonises but ill with the cosmology of the
preface to the poem; but the astronomers had long since
divided the heaven between the gods of the Babylonian
triad, and the honour of first doing so is accordingly
assigned to Merodach. Then comes an account of the
creation of the heavenly bodies&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>He prepared the stations of the great gods;</q></l>
<l>the stars corresponding to them he established as constellations;</l>
<l>he made known the year, and marked out the signs of the zodiac.</l>
<l>Three stars he assigned to each of the 12 months,</l>
<l>from the beginning of the year till (its) close.</l>
<l>He established the station of Jupiter that they might know their bounds,</l>
<l>that they should not sin, should not go astray, any one of them.</l>
<l>The stations of Bel and Ea he fixed along with it.</l>
<l>He opened gates on both sides,</l>
<l>he strengthened (their) bolts on the left hand and the right;</l>
<l>in the middle he set a staircase.<note place='foot'>Compare the <q>ladder</q> of Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 12). A similar staircase
or ladder is represented on the conical or egg-shaped stone which
symbolised the moon-god of Harran (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Lajard, <hi rend='italic'>Culte de Mithra</hi>, 54, 4).</note></l>
<l>He made the moon appear illuminating the night;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>he established it as the luminary of night that the days might be known.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here it will be noticed that, as in Genesis, the heavenly
bodies are regarded as already in existence. What the
creator did was to establish them in their stations, and
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
appoint them to mark and register time. In fact, as
soon as Ansar&mdash;the upper firmament&mdash;appeared, they
appeared also, though in an embryonic form. Merodach
is thus an arranger rather than a creator, the founder of
astronomy and the calendar rather than the maker of
the stars. It is significant, however, that there is no
reference to the sun; the sun-god could hardly fix for
himself the laws he had to obey.
</p>

<p>
It has usually been supposed that the account of the
orderly arrangement of the stars was followed by that of
the creation of animals. But the tablet on which the
latter is found is a mere fragment, and Professor Zimmern
may be right in thinking that it belongs to a different
story of the creation. At any rate, the creation in it is
assigned to <q>the gods</q> generally <q>in their assembly</q>
rather than to Merodach alone. On the other hand, as
we have seen, the author of the Epic did not hesitate to
introduce into it cosmological myths and ideas which
agreed but badly together, and it is not likely that he
would have omitted to notice the creation of animate
things.
</p>

<p>
But a description of the creation of the world, or even
of the great struggle between the gods of light and the
dragon of darkness, was not the main purpose of the
Babylonian poem. This was the glorification of the god
of Babylon. The story of the creation was introduced
into it because it was necessary that the supreme god of
the universe should also be its creator, and it was for
the same reason that the overthrow of the powers of
darkness and anarchy was assigned to Merodach alone.
He usurped and absorbed the prerogatives and attributes
of the older gods; their virtues, as it were, passed to
him along with their sovereignty and kingdom. The
fact is very plainly expressed in what appears to be the
concluding tablet of the Epic. Here the names, and
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
therewith the essential natures, of the other deities are
formally handed over to Bel-Merodach of Babylon.
Henceforward he is acknowledged in heaven as well as
in earth, the supreme Bel or Baal of Semitic faith, the
father of gods and men. Ea, the lord of the deep, and
Bel of Nippur, <q>the lord of the earth,</q> alike yield up
to him their powers; he assumes their names and titles;
and, thanks to the centralising influence of Babylon,
Babylonian religion approaches monotheism as nearly as
its local character ever allowed it to do. The creator
alone could rightfully claim the worship of the creatures
he had made.
</p>

<p>
But it was an approach merely; the final step was
never taken, even by the more speculative theologians of
Babylonia, which swept away the polytheism of the local
cults, and left Merodach without a rival.
</p>

<p>
Herein lies the great contrast between the Babylonian
and the Hebrew conceptions of the creation. The Hebrew
cosmology starts from the belief in one God, beside whom
there is none else, whether in the orderly world of to-day
or in the world of chaos that preceded it. On its forefront
stand the words, <q>In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth.</q> There was chaos, it was
true, but it was a chaos which had no existence apart
from God, who was its absolute master to carve and
fashion as He would. The deep, too, was there; but the
deep was neither the impersonation of Tiamât nor the
realm of Ea; the breath of the one God brooded over it,
awaiting the time when the creative word should be
uttered, and the breath of God should become the life of
the world. The elements, indeed, of the Hebrew cosmology
are all Babylonian; even the creative word itself
was a Babylonian conception, as the story of Merodach
has shown us; but the spirit that inspires the cosmology
is the antithesis of that which inspires the cosmologies
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
of Babylonia. Between the polytheism of Babylonia and
the monotheism of Israel a gulf is fixed which cannot
be spanned.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonian Epic of the Creation, as we may
continue to call it, sums up and incorporates the various
cosmological systems and fancies that had been current
in the country. They are thrown into a mythological
form with a philosophical introduction. We may therefore
regard it as embodying the latest and most fully
elaborated attempt of the Babylonian mind to explain
the origin of things. It is probably not much older than
the age of the Second Assyrian empire, though the
materials out of which it has been composed go back to
the earliest days of Babylonian antiquity. But it
exemplifies the three principles or fundamental ideas
upon which Babylonian cosmology rested&mdash;the belief
that water is the primal element, the belief in a lawless
chaos from which the present world has, as it were, been
rescued after a long and fierce struggle between the
powers of darkness and light, and a belief in generation
as the primary creative force. The doctrine that in
water we must see the source of all things&mdash;a doctrine
that made its way through the cosmologies of Phœnicia
and Israel into that of the Greek philosopher Thales&mdash;can
be traced back to the days when Eridu was the seaport
of Babylonia, and its inhabitants reclaimed the
marshlands from the sea, and speculated on the origin of
the soil on which they dwelt. The belief in the two
creations of darkness and light, of confusion and law,
may have arisen from the first contact between the
teaching of Nippur and that of Eridu, and the endeavour
to reconcile the antagonistic conceptions that underlay
them, and the contrary systems of creation which they
presupposed. The belief, finally, in generation as a motive
force was part of the religious heritage that was common
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
to the Semitic race. Semitic religion centred in a divine
family which corresponded to the family of the worshipper
on earth; the gods were fathers and mothers, and begat
children like the human parents, after whom they were
modelled. In so far, therefore, as the universe was divine,
it too must have been evolved in the same fashion; it
was only when it ceased to partake of the divine nature,
and to assume its present form, that the god could deal
with the materials of which it consisted, as the potter
dealt with his clay; or could even create by the simple
word of his mouth, like the man who similarly created
the names of things, and therewith the things themselves
which the names denoted. With the rise of philosophic
speculation the process of divine generation became a
process of emanation. The gods passed into mere symbols,
or rather cosmic principles and elements; they
retained, indeed, their double nature as male and female;
but that was all. The human element that once was in
them disappeared, the concrete became the abstract.
Mummu Tiamât was explained as the world of immature
ideas,&mdash;the simple <q>apprehension,</q> we might almost say,
of the Hegelian philosophy,&mdash;and the first of the <q>Æons</q>
of the later Gnosticism was thus started on its way.
Babylonian religion had been narrowly local and anthropomorphic;
under the guidance of a cosmological philosophy
it tended to become an atheistic materialism.
The poet who wrote the introduction to the Epic of the
Creation could have had but little faith in the gods and
goddesses he paraded on the scene; in the self-evolved
universe of the schools there was hardly room even for
the creator Merodach himself.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VII. The Sacred Books.</head>

<p>
Every organised religion has had its sacred books.
They have been as indispensable to it as an organised
priesthood; indeed, Mohammedanism is a proof that the
sacred book is more necessary to its existence than even
a priesthood. The sacred book binds a religion to its
past; it is the ultimate authority to which, in matters
of controversy, appeal can be made, for it enshrines
those teachings of the past upon which the faith of the
present professes to rest. It remains fixed and permanent
amid the perpetual flow and ebb of human
things; the generations of men pass quickly away, rites
and ceremonies change, the meaning of symbols is forgotten,
and the human memory is weak and deceitful;
but the written word endures, and the changes that pass
over it are comparatively few and slight.
</p>

<p>
Babylonia possessed an organised religion, a religion
that was official, and to a large extent the result of an
artificial combination of heterogeneous elements; and it
too, therefore, necessarily possessed its sacred books. But
they differed essentially from the sacred books of ancient
Egypt. The Egyptian lived for the future life rather
than for the present, and his sacred books were Books of
the Dead, intended for the guidance of the disembodied
soul in its journey through the other world. The
interest and cares of the Babylonian, on the contrary,
were centred in the present life. The other world was
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
for him a land of shadow and forgetfulness; a dreary
world of darkness and semi-conscious existence to which
he willingly closed his eyes. It was in this world that
he was rewarded or punished for his deeds, that he had
intercourse with the gods of light, and that he was, as
is often said in the hymns, <q>the son of his god.</q> What
he needed, accordingly, from his sacred books was
guidance in this world, not in the world beyond the
grave.
</p>

<p>
The sacred books of Babylonia thus fall into three
classes. We have, first, the so-called magical texts or
incantations, the object of which was to preserve the
faithful from disease and mischief, to ward off death,
and to defeat the evil arts of the witch and the sorcerer.
Secondly, there are the hymns to the gods; and, lastly,
the penitential psalms, which resemble in many respects
the psalms of the Old Testament, and were employed
not only by the individual, but also in seasons of public
calamity or dismay. We owe the first discovery of this
sacred literature to the genius of François Lenormant;
he it was who first drew attention to it and characterised
its several divisions. It was François Lenormant, moreover,
who pointed out that its nearest analogue was the
Hindu Veda, a brilliant intuition which has been verified
by subsequent research.
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately our knowledge of it is still exceedingly
imperfect. We are dependent on the fragmentary
copies of it which have come from the library of
Nineveh, and which resemble the torn leaves, mixed
pell-mell together, that alone remain in some Oriental
library from vanished manuscripts of the Bible and
the Christian Fathers. Until the great libraries of
Babylonia itself are thoroughly explored, our analysis
and explanation of the sacred literature of the country
must be provisional only; the evidence is defective, and
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
the conclusions we draw from it must needs be defective
as well.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the purely ritual texts, which stand to the
hymns in the same relation that the Atharva-Veda
stands to the Ṛig-Veda, have as yet been but little
examined. Their translation is difficult and obscure, and
the ceremonies described in them are but half understood.
The ritual, nevertheless, constituted an important
part of the sacred literature, and its rubrics were
regarded with at least as much reverence as the rubrics
of the Anglican Prayer-book. Doubtless the actual
words of which they consisted did not possess the same
magical or divine power as those of the incantations and
hymns, they were not&mdash;in modern language&mdash;verbally
inspired, but they prescribed rites and actions which had
quite as divine and authoritative an origin as the hymns
themselves. They were, furthermore, the framework in
which the hymns and spells were set; and they all
formed together a single act of divine worship, the
several parts of which could not be separated without
endangering the efficacy of the whole.
</p>

<p>
That the incantations were the older portion of the
sacred literature of Chaldæa, was perceived by Lenormant.
They go back to the age of animism, to the days
when, as yet, the multitudinous spirits and demons of
Sumerian belief had not made way for the gods of
Semitic Babylonia, or the sorcerer and medicine-man
for a hierarchy of priests. Their language as well as
their spirit is Sumerian, and the <foreign rend='italic'>zi</foreign> or <q>spirit</q> of heaven
and earth is invoked to repel the attack of the evil
ghost, or to shower blessings on the head of the worshipper.
They transport us into a world that harmonises
but badly with the decorous and orderly realm of the gods
of light; it is a world in which the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>utuk</foreign>, the
<foreign rend='italic'>galla</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>, reign supreme, and little room
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
seems to be left for the deities of the Semitic faith.
The gods themselves, when they are introduced into it,
wear a new aspect. Ea is no longer the creator and
culture god, but a master of magic spells; and his son
Asari displays his goodness towards mankind by instructing
them how to remove the sorceries in which
they have been involved, and the witcheries with which
they are tormented.
</p>

<p>
But it must be borne in mind that the incantations do
not all belong to the same age. The description I have
just given holds good only of the oldest part of them.
The Sumerian population continued to exist in Babylonia
after the Semitic occupation of the country, and
Sumerian animism continued to exist as well. By the
side of the higher Semitic faith, with its gods and
goddesses, its priesthood and its cult, the ancient belief
in sorcery and witchcraft, in spells and incantations, and
in the ghost-world of En-lil, flourished among the people.
And as in India, where Brahmanism has thrown its
protection over the older cults and beliefs of the native
tribes, assimilating them as far as possible, or explaining
them in accordance with the orthodox creed; so too in
ancient Babylonia, the primeval animism of the people
was tacitly recognised by the religion of the State, and
given an official sanction. There was no declaration of
hostility towards it such as was made by the religion of
Israel; on the contrary, the old incantations were preserved
and modernised, and the sanctity with which
they had been invested allowed to remain unimpaired.
At the same time, they were harmonised, so far as
could be, with the official creed. The gods of the State
religion were introduced into them, and to these gods
appeal was made rather than to <q>the spirit of heaven</q>
and <q>the spirit of earth.</q> The spirits and ghosts of the
night existed, indeed, but from henceforth they had to
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
be subservient to the deities of the official faith. It was
no longer the medicine-man, but the priest of the
Semitic deity, who recited the incantation for the suppliant
and the sufferer.
</p>

<p>
We can almost trace the growth of what I will term
the Book of Incantations down to the time when it
assumed its final form. It was no Book, however, in
the proper sense of the term, and it is doubtful whether
all the collections which might have been comprised in
it were ever combined together. But it is convenient
to speak of it in the singular, so long as we remember
that this is merely a mode of speech.
</p>

<p>
As a matter of fact, each great sanctuary seems to
have had its own collection. These were added to from
time to time; some of them were amalgamated together,
or parts belonging to one collection were incorporated
into another. Spells which had been found effective in
warding off disease or preventing evil, were introduced into
a collection which related to the same subject, whatever
may have been their source, and the list of gods invoked
was continually being enlarged, in the hope that some
one at least among them might give the sufferer relief.
The older collections were modified in accordance with
the requirements of the State religion, and the animism
that inspired them accommodated to the orthodox belief;
while new collections came into existence which breathed
the later Semitic spirit, and were drawn up under the
supervision of the Babylonian priesthood. Hymns and
even penitential psalms were embodied in them, like the
verses of the Bible or the Quran, which are still used as
charms in Christian and Mohammedan countries; and it
is sometimes difficult to distinguish between the hymn
that served merely as an incantation and the hymn that
was chanted in the service of the gods. Indeed, incantatory
formulæ are not unfrequently intermixed with the
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
words of the hymn or psalm, producing that grotesque
and embarrassing medley of exalted spiritual thought
and stupid superstition which so often meets us in the
religious literature of Babylonia. How late some of the
collections are in the history of Babylonian religion, may
be judged from the fact that a time came when the old
Sumerian language was no longer considered necessary
to ensure the efficacy of the charm, and collections of
incantations were made in the Semitic language of later
Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
Criticism will hereafter have to sift and distinguish
these collections one from the other, and, above all,
determine the earlier and later elements contained in
each. At present such a task is impossible. Few, if
any, of the collections have come down to us in a perfect
state; there are many more, doubtless, which future
research will hereafter bring to light; and as long as we
are dependent solely on the copies made for the library
of Nineveh, without being able to compare them with the
older texts of the Babylonian libraries, the primary condition
of scientific investigation is wanting. Nevertheless
there are certain collections which stand out markedly
from among the rest. They display features of greater
antiquity, and the animism presupposed by them is but
thinly disguised. It is comparatively easy to separate
in them the newer and older elements, which have little
in common with each other. Most of them point to
Eridu as the source from which they have been derived,
though there are others the origin of which is probably
to be sought at Nippur.
</p>

<p>
In these older incantations the gods of the official cult
are absent, except where their names have been violently
foisted in at a later date, and their place is taken by the
spirits or ghosts of early Sumerian belief. The <foreign rend='italic'>Zi</foreign> or
<q>spirit of the sky,</q> <q>the spirit of the earth,</q> <q>the spirit
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
of Ansar and Kisar,</q> such are the superhuman powers
that are invoked, and to whom the worshipper turns in
his extremity. Even when we come across a name that
is borne by one of the deities of the later Babylonian
religion, we find that it is the name not of a god, but of
a denizen of the ghost-world. <q>O spirit of Zikum, mother
of Ea,</q> we read in one place; <q>O spirit of Nina, daughter
of Ea</q>; <q>O spirit, divine lord of the mother-father of
En-lil; O spirit, divine lady of the mother-father of Nin-lil</q>;
<q>O spirit of the moon, O spirit of the sun, O spirit
of the evening star!</q> There is as yet neither Bel of
Nippur, nor Sin and Samas and Istar; the sorcerer
knows only of the spirits that animate the universe, and
bring good and evil upon mankind. Nothing can be
more striking than the enumeration of the divine powers
to whom the prayer is directed, in an incantation of which
I have given the translation in my Hibbert Lectures
(p. 450 sqq.)&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Whether it be the spirit of the divine lord of the earths;</q></l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of the earths;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lord of the stars;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of the stars;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lord of progenies;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of progenies;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lord of ...;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of ...;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lord of the holy mound (Ea);</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of the holy mound (Damkina);</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lord of the dayspring of life;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine lady of the dayspring of life;</l>
<l>or the spirit of the divine chanter of the spirit-hosts (En-me-sarra);</l>
<l><q rend='post'>or the spirit of the divine chantress of the spirit-hosts.</q><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>En-me</foreign>, literally, <q>lord of the voice,</q> appears to have been pronounced
<foreign rend='italic'>ên</foreign> in Sumerian, since the Semitic <foreign rend='italic'>ênu</foreign> was borrowed from it. The word
has the same root as <foreign rend='italic'>ên</foreign>, <q>an incantation,</q> and the <foreign rend='italic'>ênu</foreign> denoted the priest
who <q>recited</q> the incantatory ritual. He may thus be compared with
the Egyptian <foreign rend='italic'>kher-heb</foreign>. There was an <foreign rend='italic'>ênu</foreign> or <q>chanter of Istar,</q> whose
technical name was <foreign rend='italic'>ukurrim</foreign>, and another of Ea, <q>the holy father,</q> who
was called the <foreign rend='italic'>sennu</foreign>. The incantatory formulæ, it must be remembered,
relate for the most part to Ea and Istar. Another class of the <foreign rend='italic'>ênu</foreign> was
called <foreign rend='italic'>sailu</foreign>, <q>the magian,</q> in Assyrian (literally, <q>the questioner</q> of the
spirits who may have practised ventriloquism); in Sumerian the name
may be read <foreign rend='italic'>ên-lil</foreign>, <q>the chanter of the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>.</q></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<p>
Even the word <q>divine,</q> which I have used here in
default of anything better, imports theological ideas into
the texts which were really foreign to them. The
original means nothing more than <q>superhuman</q> or
perhaps <q>non-human</q>; the Sumerian term is <foreign rend='italic'>dimmer</foreign>,
of which <foreign rend='italic'>dimme</foreign>, <q>a ghost,</q> and <foreign rend='italic'>dimmea</foreign>, <q>a spectre,</q> are
but other forms; and the ideograph by which it is symbolised
is an eight-rayed star.<note place='foot'>I can still see no better etymology for <foreign rend='italic'>dimmer</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>dingir</foreign>, <q>god,</q> than
the one I proposed in my Hibbert Lectures (p. 143), viz. <foreign rend='italic'>dim</foreign>, <q>to create</q>
or <q>make.</q> From the same root we have <foreign rend='italic'>dim</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>dimma</foreign>, <q>offspring</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 29. 71), which illustrates the antithesis between the Sumerian
who regarded generation as an act of creation, and the Semite who regarded
creation as an act of generation. In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 47. 29, <foreign rend='italic'>dim</foreign> takes the
place of <foreign rend='italic'>dumu</foreign>, <q>son.</q> <foreign rend='italic'>Dimme</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>dimmea</foreign> show that in <foreign rend='italic'>dimmer</foreign> the
final consonant is a suffix.</note> <q>The divine lord</q> and
<q>divine lady</q> of the incantation are but the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign> and its
handmaid under another guise; they are merely the
ghost-like spirits who display themselves at night in
the points of light that twinkle and move through the
sky.
</p>

<p>
The theologians of a later day amused themselves by
cataloguing the Sumerian names of the spirits invoked
in the ancient incantations, and transforming them into
titles of the deities of the official pantheon. The same
process had been followed in the Semitic translations
which were added to the incantatory texts. The spirit
of the sun became Samas, the spirit of the evening star
became Istar. En-lil of Nippur was transmuted into Bel,
and Nin-lil, the lady of the ghost-world, into Bilat or
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
Beltis. The process was facilitated by the changes undergone
at Eridu by the magical texts themselves, even before
the days of Semitic influence. Maritime intercourse with
other lands had already deeply affected the theology of
Eridu; the crude animism of an earlier epoch had made
way for the conception of a culture-god who taught men
the elements of civilisation, and wrote books for their
instruction. He was still a <q>spirit</q> rather than a god
in the Semitic sense of the word, but he was a spirit who
had emerged above the rest, who had acquired those
family ties which formed the very foundation of civilised
life, and to whom the creation of the world was due. Ea
was not indeed a Baal, but he was already on the way to
become a god in human form.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, both Ea and his son Asari still
appear in animal shape. Asari is, it is true, <q>the benefactor
of man,</q> but he is also <q>the mighty one of the
princely gazelle,</q> and even <q>the gazelle</q> himself; while
Ea is <q>the antelope of the deep,</q> or more simply <q>the
antelope.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 55. 27, iv. 25. 40. I have retained here the ordinary
rendering of <q>gazelle</q> for the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>ditanu</foreign>, though it is more probable
that its Sumerian equivalent <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign> (perhaps the Heb. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>âyîl</foreign>) means
<q>ram.</q> At all events <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign> is given as <foreign rend='italic'>kuṡarikku</foreign> or <q>ram</q> in Sc. 315.
But there is a difficulty about the god to whom the name was originally
applied. In <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 55. 31-33, <q>the princely <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign>,</q> <q>the mighty
<foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign>,</q> and <q>the earth-creating <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign></q> are given as names of Ea; whereas
in <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 21. 11, <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign> is a synonym of the god Aṡari, and in Sc. 312
it is the equivalent of El-lil. As <q>the ship</q> or ark of Ea was <q>the ship
of the antelope of the deep,</q> Ea must have been the antelope (<foreign rend='italic'>turakhu</foreign>)
rather than the ram or gazelle; and I believe, therefore, that the transference
of what was properly the name of El-lil to Asari and Ea was due to
the confusion that grew up between El-lil after his transformation into
the Semitic Bel and Asari after his transformation into the Semitic Bel-Merodach.
The ideograph which denotes <foreign rend='italic'>elim</foreign> represents a quadruped,
sometimes with an eye, sometimes with the ideograph of sheep, attached
to it.</note> At other times he is the <q>lord of the earth</q>
which he has created, or the <q>king</q> of that <q>holy
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
mound</q> of waters which rose up against the sky like a
mountain, and behind which the sun appeared at dawn.
The titles that he bears point unmistakably to Eridu.
Here alone Ea was the creator of the earth, and here
too, in the temple of the god, was a likeness of that <q>holy
mound</q> whereon the future destinies of mankind were
declared. The oldest incantations which have come down
to us must have been composed at Eridu in the days of
its Sumerian animism.
</p>

<p>
There are other divine or semi-divine names in them
which tell the same tale. The pure waters which heal
the sick and destroy the power of witchcraft are brought
by the water-spirit Nin-akha-kudda, <q>the mistress of
spells,</q> whom the theologians of a later time transformed
into a daughter of Ea. Bau, too, the heifer of the city
of Isin,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 52, Col. iv. 8.</note> appears along with the water-spirit. Like
Zikum, she was the mother of Ea and <q>the generatress of
mankind,</q> and she shared with Asari the honours of the
New Year's festival. But Bau, it would seem, was not
originally from Eridu. She had come there from a
neighbouring city, and her presence in the incantations
is a proof that even in these oldest monuments of a
sacred literature we are still far from the beginnings of
Babylonian religion.
</p>

<p>
At Nippur it was the ghosts and vampires, who had
their habitation beneath the ground, that were objects of
terror to the men who lived upon it. At Eridu the
demons were rather the raging winds and storm-clouds
which lashed the waters of Ea into fury, and seemed for
a time to transform his kingdom into a chaos of lawless
destruction. The fisherman perished in his bark, while
the salt waves inundated the land and ravaged the fields
of the husbandman. It was here, on the shores of the
Persian Gulf, that the story of the great flood was perhaps
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
first thrown into literary form, and that conception of the
universe grew up which found its last expression in the
legend of the struggle between Merodach and the forces
of anarchy. At any rate it was here that the spirits of
evil were pictured as the seven evil demons in whom the
tempest was, as it were, incarnated&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Seven are they, seven are they,</q></l>
<l>in the hollow of the deep seven are they!</l>
<l>Gleams (?) of the sky are those seven.</l>
<l>In the hollow of the deep, in a palace, they grew up.</l>
<l>Male they are not, female they are not.</l>
<l>Destructive whirlwinds are they.</l>
<l>Wife they have not, child they beget not;</l>
<l>compassion and mercy they do not know.</l>
<l>Prayer and supplication hear they not.</l>
<l>Horses bred in the mountains are they.</l>
<l>Unto Ea are they hostile.</l>
<l>The throne-bearers of the gods are they.</l>
<l>To work mischief in the street they settle in the highway.</l>
<l>Evil are they, evil are they!</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Seven are they, seven are they, seven twice again are they!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The seven evil spirits played an important part in the
demonology of ancient Eridu, and echoes of it survive in
the later literature. They were even transmuted into a
god, and unified in his person under the name of <q>the
divine seven</q>;<note place='foot'>Perhaps, however, the <q>divine seven</q> was descended from the seven
gods who were sons of En-me-sarra, according to <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 23, No. 1.
En-me-sarra means <q>the incantation-priest of the (heavenly) hosts</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>ênu
sa kissati</foreign>), and his <q>sons</q> therefore remind us of Job xxxviii. 7. It will
not be forgotten that Philo Byblius made <q>the seven sons of Sydyk, the
Kabeiri, with their eighth brother Asklêpios (Ashmûn),</q> the first writers
of history (Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Prœp. evang.</hi> i. 10).</note> while the last month of the year, the
stormy Adar, was dedicated to them. But in earlier
days it needed all the wisdom of Ea to counteract their
wicked devices. The fire-god himself was sent to drive
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
them from their victims, and to disclose their nature and
origin&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>In the mountain of the sunset,</q> it is said, <q>those seven were born;</q></l>
<l>in the mountain of the sunrise those seven grew up;</l>
<l>in the hollows of the earth they have their dwelling;</l>
<l>on the high-places of the earth their names are proclaimed.</l>
<l>As for them, in heaven and earth they have no dwelling, hidden is their name.</l>
<l>Among the sentient gods they are not known.</l>
<l>Their name in heaven and earth exists not.</l>
<l>Those seven from the mountain of the sunset gallop forth,</l>
<l>those seven in the mountain of the sunrise are bound to rest.</l>
<l>In the hollows of the earth they set the foot;</l>
<l>on the high-places of the earth they lift the neck.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>They by nought are known; in heaven and earth there is no knowledge of them.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The hymn or incantation which thus describes them belongs to a late period in the history of Babylonian
religion. The animism of primitive times has been replaced
by the gods and goddesses of the later official
faith. But the belief in the seven evil spirits still
lingered, not only in the popular mind, but also in the
ranks of the official hierarchy; and it was still remembered
that they had been at the outset the spirits of the
tempest, born in the clefts of the ravine or on the stormy
mountain-top, from whence they issued like wild horses.
The flame of sacrifice could alone avert their onset, and
incantations were still composed under official sanction,
with the help of which they might be driven away. The
fact shows to how late an epoch the composition of spells
and incantatory hymns may come down, even when the
atmosphere they breathe is still that of Eridu, and the
language in which they are written is still the sacred
Sumerian. But there are collections of magical hymns
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
and formulæ which are even yet later in date. The
eight books of the so-called Maqlû or <q>Burning</q> collection
are written throughout in Semitic Babylonian;<note place='foot'>It has been edited and translated by Tallqvist, <hi rend='italic'>Die Assyrische Beschwörungsserie
Maqlû</hi> (1894), who calculates that it contained 1550 lines, or
more than 9000 words.</note>
and though two out of the nine books of another collection&mdash;that
of the Surpu or <q>Consuming Fever</q>&mdash;are
bilingual, they have been clearly translated from the
more original Babylonian into Sumerian, like the Latin
exercises of to-day.<note place='foot'>The whole work is in the metrical form characteristic of Semitic Babylonian.
It has been edited by Zimmern, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
babylonischen Religion; Die Beschwörungstafeln Shurpu</hi> (1896).</note> The official canon of the magical
texts, in fact, was long in formation, and did not assume
its final shape until the age of Khammurabi or later, even
though its roots go back to the earliest period of Babylonia,
to the age of animism and the medicine-man, when
the Sumerian was still dominant in the land, and the
Semitic nomad or trader was content to learn from him
the elements of civilisation.
</p>

<p>
The official canon had been collected together from all
sides. Most of the great sanctuaries of the country had
probably contributed to it; in most, if not in all, of them
there must have been magical rituals which had grown
up under the care and supervision of the priesthood, and
in which the old beliefs of the people were disciplined
and harmonised with the dogmas of the State creed. Up
to the last, one of the classes into which the priesthood
was divided was known as the Êni or <q>Chanters,</q> whose
name was derived from the Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>ên</foreign>, <q>an incantation.</q>
It is this word which is prefixed to the charms and
incantatory hymns that constitute so integral a part of
the magical texts; and though in course of time it came
to denote little more than <q>recitation,</q> it was a recitation
which possessed magical powers, and for which, therefore,
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
a special training was necessary. A single mistake in
pronunciation or intonation, a single substitution of one
word for another, was sufficient to destroy the charm and
necessitate the repetition of the ceremony. Some of the
incantations had even to be recited in a whisper, like
certain parts of the Roman missal; and a whole series
or collection is accordingly termed the ritual of <q>the
whispered charm,</q> reminding us of the passage in the
Book of Isaiah where the prophet refers to <q>the wizards
that peep and that mutter.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. viii. 19. The beginning, for instance, of the second book of the
Maqlû collection had to be recited in a whisper before a wax image.</note>
</p>

<p>
By the side of the <q>Book of Incantations</q>&mdash;whether
it ever existed or not&mdash;there was another sacred book
containing hymns to the gods. Here, again, it is more
than doubtful whether the various collections of hymns
compiled for use in the great sanctuaries of the country
were ever combined together and incorporated into a
single volume. The tendency to religious centralisation
and unification in Babylonia was arrested before it could
produce in religion what the seventy-two books of the
<q>Illumination of Bel</q> were for astronomy and astrology,
a compilation in which the observations of the past were
collected and brought together.<note place='foot'>As the title of the latter work is sometimes written <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ud-ma an
en-lil</hi> as well as <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ud an en-lil</hi>, the real translation may be <q>when
(<foreign rend='italic'>enu-ma</foreign>) Bel,</q> rather than <q>Illumination (<foreign rend='italic'>namaru</foreign>) of Bel,</q> these having
been the opening words of the first tablet. Since, however, it was
translated into Greek by Berossos as a work of <q>Bel</q> (Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Quæst.
Nat.</hi> iii. 29), the name assigned to it in the text is on the whole to be
preferred.</note> Babylon, despite its
political predominance, never succeeded in absorbing the
religious cults of the more venerable sanctuaries of the
country; the historical conservatism of the people was
too strong, and even Nabonidos was forced to lavish gifts
on the shrine of the sun-god at Sippara as well as upon
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
that of Merodach at Babylon. The priesthood of Babylon
were content to be chief among their peers; there was
no monotheistic zeal to sweep away the rival temples,
and the intensely localised character of Babylonian
religion prevented the rise of monotheism. And without
religious centralisation a common service-book and canon
are not very probable. Perhaps, moreover, the hymns to
the gods were too long in detaching themselves from the
magical ritual, and too late in acquiring a sacred character
of their own, to attain the same degree of divine authority
as the incantations. Many of them are not only in
Semitic Assyrian, but were composed as late as the reigns
of the last Assyrian kings, while even those which are
bilingual seem to have been in many cases the work
of Semitic poets, the Sumerian text being a translation
from the Semitic into the sacred language of theology.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, Lenormant was not far wrong in
comparing the religious hymns of Chaldæa with those of
the Rig-Veda. Like the latter, they belong to different
periods of time, and comprise poems as unlike one another
as war-songs and incantations and philosophic addresses
to the gods. Moreover, as in the case of the incantations,
there were collections of hymns addressed to the god or
gods of the sanctuary in whose service they were used.
Thus many of them belong to a collection that must
have been made for the temple of the sun-god at Sippara
or Larsa; all alike are addressed to the sun-god, the
supreme judge of mankind; and the language that is used
of him is the same in each. Other hymns celebrate the
moon-god of Ur, while others belong to Nippur or to the
sanctuary of Merodach at Babylon. The hymn to the
god was as much a necessary portion of divine service as
the incantation or the ceremonial rite.
</p>

<p>
The ritual texts tell us how and when it was employed.
Thus on the festival of the New Year the service in the
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
temple of Bel-Merodach was opened by a hymn in
honour of his ark; and on the second of Nisan the priest
was ordered to go down to the Euphrates at the beginning
of the first hour of the night, and then, after putting
on the prescribed vestment, and taking the waters of the
river in his hand, to <q>enter into the presence of Bel,</q> and
there recite a long hymn in praise of the god. The
hymn closed with a prayer&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Show mercy to thy city of Babylon;</q></l>
<l>to Ê-Saggil thy temple incline thy face;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>grant the prayers of thy people the sons of Babylon!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But there is yet another proof of the sacred character
that attached itself to the hymns. Many of them were
employed as incantations. Not only were they introduced
into the magical texts, like the verses of the
Bible when used as charms, but the magical element was
inserted in the hymn itself. The address to the deity
was combined with spells and incantations, producing a
confused medley of spiritual expressions and grovelling
superstition that is at once repellent and grotesque to
our modern notions. The hymn, moreover, is prefaced
by the word <foreign rend='italic'>ên</foreign> or <q>incantation,</q> which makes its words
as authoritative and unalterable as the rest of the magical
ritual. The same sacredness that invests the latter
invests also the hymn. The hymn, in short, is as much
verbally inspired as the incantation or spell; indeed,
between the hymn and the incantation no clear line of
demarcation was drawn by the Babylonian, and it is
questionable whether he would have recognised that
there was any such line at all.
</p>

<p>
It was in the use that was made of them, and not in
their essential nature, that the hymn to the god and the
incantation differed from one another. And as animism
preceded the official religion of Babylonia, and the belief
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
in spirits preceded the worship of the gods, so too did
the incantation precede the hymn. The sacredness that
was acquired by the hymn was originally reflected from
the incantation; it was not the contents of the hymn,
but the actual words of which it was composed, that
gave it its sacred and authoritative character, and consecrated
its employment by the priestly caste.
</p>

<p>
It is accordingly with good reason that I have described
the hymns, like the incantations proper, as
verbally inspired. The inspiration lay in the words
more than in the sense they conveyed; an error of
pronunciation was more fatal than a misunderstanding
of their meaning. As long as the words were recited
correctly, it mattered little whether either priest or
people understood precisely what they meant.
</p>

<p>
I have already in an earlier lecture quoted some lines
from the hymn to the moon-god which was probably
composed for the services in the great temple of Ur.
The hymns in honour of the sun-god are much more
numerous, and formed part of a collection which seems to
have been made by the priests of Bit-Uri, the temple of
the sun-god at Sippara. The sun-god they celebrate is
the incorruptible <q>judge of mankind,</q> the rewarder of
the innocent and the punisher of the guilty, who sees all
that is done on earth, and acts towards those who call
upon him with justice and mercy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>O lord,</q> we read in one of them,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 19, No. 2.</note> <q>illuminator of the darkness, opener of the sickly face,</q></l>
<l>merciful god, who setteth up the fallen, who helpeth the weak,</l>
<l>unto thy light look the great gods,</l>
<l>the spirits of earth all gaze upon thy face.</l>
<l>Tongues in unison like a single word thou directest,</l>
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
<l>smiting their heads they look to the light of the mid-day sun.</l>
<l>Like a wife thou standest, glad and gladdening.</l>
<l>Thou art their light in the vault of the far-off heaven.</l>
<l>Thou art the object of their gaze in the broad earth.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Men far and near behold thee and rejoice!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The language of another hymn is in a similar strain&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Direct the law of the multitudes of mankind!</q></l>
<l>Thou art eternal righteousness in the heavens!</l>
<l>Thou art of faithful judgment towards all the world!</l>
<l>Thou knowest what is right, thou knowest what is wrong.</l>
<l>O sun-god, righteousness hath lifted up its foot!</l>
<l>O sun-god, wickedness hath been cut down as with a knife!</l>
<l>O sun-god, the minister of Anu and Bel art thou!</l>
<l>O sun-god, the judge supreme of heaven and earth art thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O lord of the living creation, the pitiful one (who directest) the world!</l>
<l>O sun-god, on this day purify and illumine the king the son of his god!</l>
<l>Whatever worketh evil in his body let it be taken away!</l>
<l>Cleanse him like the goblet of the Zoganes!</l>
<l>Illumine him like a cup of ghee;</l>
<l>like the copper of a polished tablet let him be made bright!</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Release him from the ban!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 28, No. 1.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The last words illustrate that strange mixture of
spiritual thought and the arts of the sorcerer to which I
have more than once alluded. The hymns to the sun-god
were not yet emancipated from the magical beliefs
and ceremonies in which they had had their origin; they
were still incantations rather than hymns in the modern
sense of the word. The collection to which they belonged
must have been used by the class of priests known as
<q>Chanters</q> or <q>Enchanters,</q> who had succeeded to the
sorcerers and medicine-men of the pre-Semitic past; and
the fact explains how it is that in many of them we
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
have an alternating antiphonal service, portions of them
being recited by the priest and other portions by the
worshipper. In some instances, indeed, the verses seem
to have been alternately intoned by the priest and the
assistant ministers, like the canticles or psalms in the
Christian worship of to-day. The practice had its origin
in the magical ritual, where the sorcerer first recited the
incantation, and then called upon the individual to repeat
it once or oftener after him. It is another proof of the
intimate connection that existed between the hymns and
the incantations out of which they had sprung; like the
Veda or the Zend-Avesta, the sacred books of ancient
Chaldæa mixed magic and the spiritual worship of the
gods together in a confusion which seems to us difficult
to understand.
</p>

<p>
It was the same with the penitential psalms which
constitute the third division of the sacred literature of
Babylonia. In many respects they resemble the psalms
of the Old Testament. Like them they are intended for
public use, in spite of their individualistic form; the
individual represents the community, and at times it is
the national calamity and the national sin to which
reference is made. After the revolt and reconquest of
Babylon by Assur-bani-pal, when the city was still
polluted by the corpses of those who had perished by
famine or the sword, the prophets<note place='foot'>Literally, <q>the prophetdom</q> or <q>college of prophets</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>isipputi</foreign>).</note> ordered that its
shrines and temple-roads should be purified, that its
<q>wrathful gods and angry goddesses</q> should be <q>appeased
by prayers and penitential psalms,</q> and that then, and
only then, the daily sacrifices in the temples should be
offered once more.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 4. 86-91.</note> Doubtless the penitential psalms
were in the first instance the spontaneous outpouring of
the heart of the individual; it was his sufferings that
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
they depicted, and his sins that they deplored; but as
soon as they had been introduced into the worship of the
temple, and become part of the public cult, the individual
element in them fell into the background, and in the sins
and sufferings of the individual both priest and laity saw
those of the whole community.
</p>

<p>
Like the Hebrew psalms, again, they express the belief
that sin is the cause of suffering and calamity, and that
it can be removed by penitence and prayer to the offended
deity. But whereas the Hebrew monotheist knew of
one God only who could inflict punishment and listen to
the repentant words of the sinner, the Babylonian polytheist
was distracted by the uncertainty as to what
particular divinity he had offended, and to whom, therefore,
his penitent appeal should be addressed. In the
penitential psalms, accordingly, it is the vague and
general <q>god</q> and <q>goddess</q> that are invoked, rather
than a particular deity. It is only occasionally that
the names of special gods are introduced, and then a
long list of them is sometimes given, in the hope that
among them might be the divinity whose anger had been
excited, and whose wrath the sufferer was eager to
appease.
</p>

<p>
Sin, it must be remembered, in the eyes of the
Babylonian included a good deal more than moral
wrong-doing. There were ritual sins as well as moral
sins, offences against the ceremonial law as well as
against the moral or spiritual code. The sin was not
unfrequently involuntary, and the sufferer did not even
know in what particular respect he had offended against
the divine laws. It may have been the eating of forbidden
food, such as that which drove Adam and Eve
from the sinless garden of Paradise. Or, again, it may
have been a real sin, a sin of thought and word committed
in the secrecy of the heart. <q>Was he frank in
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
speaking,</q> it is asked in a confession which is put into
the mouth of a suppliant, <q>but false in heart? Was
it <q>yes</q> with his mouth, but <q>no</q> in his heart?</q> So
far as the punishment was concerned, little distinction
was made between moral and ceremonial sin; both were
visited alike, and the sin of ignorance was punished as
severely as the sin that was committed with deliberate
intent.
</p>

<p>
The recitation of the penitential psalms was accompanied
by fasting. <q>Food I have not eaten,</q> the
penitent is made to say, <q>pure water I have not
drunk.</q> And, as in the case of the incantations and
hymns, the recitation was antiphonal. Portions of the
psalms were recited by the priest, who acted as the
mediator between the penitent and the offended deity;
other portions by the penitent himself, or a choir of
attendant ministers. The ideas which had been associated
with the use of the incantations still dominated
the public cult. Indeed, the penitential psalm sometimes
very nearly approaches the incantation in character.
On the one side, it is difficult to distinguish
from the psalm a confession like that from which I
quoted just now, and which nevertheless forms part of
a magical ritual; on the other side, the psalm itself at
times degenerates into the language of magic. Babylonia
never shook off the influence of those collections
of incantations which constituted its first sacred book,
and gave it its first conception of a divinely-inspired
literature; up to the last the descendants of the old
medicine-man occupied a recognised place in the priestly
hierarchy, and the <q>Chanter</q> and <q>Augur</q> stood on
the same footing as the <q>prophet</q> and the <q>priest.</q>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps it was the same influence which demanded
that the language of the penitential psalm should be
the extinct Sumerian. That some of the psalms went
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
back to Sumerian times and were composed by Sumerians
in their own tongue, I have little doubt; but it seems
also unquestionable that many of the psalms which have
come down to us were of Semitic origin, the Sumerian
version attached to them being really a translation of
the original Semitic text. At all events, penitential
psalms were written in later times in Assyria, whose
authors either did not care or did not know how to
provide them with a Sumerian text. It may be that
they did not possess the same sacred authority as the
older psalms, but, like the latter, they were used in the
public services of the northern kingdom with the
authorisation of the king. The king in Assyria, it must
be remembered, exercised the influence that was wielded
by the priesthood in the southern kingdom. The Assyrian
psalms, in fact, were like our modern hymns; the
sanctity that surrounded the older penitential psalms
of Babylonia was indeed denied them, but they better
suited the newer age and the character of the Assyrian
people, and there was no omnipotent priesthood to forbid
their introduction into the public cult. They stood, it
is true, outside the sacred canon of Babylonia, in the
sense that no dogmas of religion could be built on them,
and it is probable that they never received the sanction
of the Babylonian priests; but for all that the spirit
they breathe is that of the older psalms; and had the
Assyrian empire lasted longer, it is possible that they
too might have become a sacred book.
</p>

<p>
I will conclude my lecture with one of the penitential
psalms, which, we are told, might be addressed <q>to any
god</q>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The heart of my lord is wroth; may it be appeased!</q></l>
<l>May the god that I know not be pacified!</l>
<l>May the goddess whom I know not be pacified!</l>
<l>May the god I know and (the god) I know not be pacified!</l>
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
<l>May the goddess I know and (the goddess) I know not be pacified!</l>
<l>May the heart of my god be appeased!</l>
<l>May the heart of my goddess be appeased!</l>
<l>May the god and the goddess I know and I know not be pacified!</l>
<l>May the god (who has smitten me be pacified)!</l>
<l>May the goddess (who has smitten me be pacified)!</l>
<l>The sin that (I sinned) I knew not;</l>
<l>the sin (that I committed I knew not).</l>
<l>The word of blessing (may my god pronounce upon me);</l>
<l>a name of blessing (may the god I know and I know not) record for me!</l>
<l>The word of blessing (may the goddess pronounce upon me)!</l>
<l>Food I have not eaten,</l>
<l>pure water I have not drunk.</l>
<l>An offence against my god unknowingly have I committed;</l>
<l>an offence against my goddess unknowingly I have wrought.</l>
<l>O lord, my sins are many, my transgressions are great!</l>
<l>O my god, my sins are many, my transgressions are great!</l>
<l>O my goddess, my sins are many, my transgressions are great!</l>
<l>O god whom I know and whom I know not, my sins are many, my transgressions are great!</l>
<l>O goddess whom I know and whom I know not, my sins are many, my transgressions are great!</l>
<l>The sin that I sinned I knew not,</l>
<l>the transgression I committed I knew not.</l>
<l>The offence I committed I knew not,</l>
<l>the offence that I wrought I knew not.</l>
<l>The lord in the wrath of his heart has regarded me;</l>
<l>god has visited me in the anger of his heart;</l>
<l>the goddess has been violent against me, and has put me to grief.</l>
<l>The god whom I know and whom I know not has oppressed me,</l>
<l>the goddess whom I know and whom I know not has brought sorrow upon me.</l>
<l>I sought for help, and none took my hand;</l>
<l>I wept, and none stood at my side;</l>
<l>I cried aloud, and there was none that heard me.</l>
<l>I am in trouble and hiding, and dare not look up.</l>
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
<l>To my god, the merciful one, I turn myself, I utter my prayer,</l>
<l>the feet of my goddess I kiss and water with tears.</l>
<l>To the god whom I know and whom I know not I utter my prayer.</l>
<l>O lord, look upon (me; receive my prayer)!</l>
<l>O goddess, look upon (me; receive my prayer)!</l>
<l>O goddess whom I know (and whom I know not, receive my prayer)!</l>
<l>How long, O god, (must I suffer)?</l>
<l>How long, O goddess, (shall thy face be turned from me)?</l>
<l>How long, O god whom I know and whom I know not, shall the anger (of thy heart continue)?</l>
<l>How long, O goddess whom I know and whom I know not, shall the wrath of thy heart be unappeased?</l>
<l>Mankind is made to wander, and there is none that knoweth.</l>
<l>Mankind, as many as have a name, what do they know?</l>
<l>Whether he shall have good or ill, there is none that knoweth.</l>
<l>O lord, cast not away thy servant!</l>
<l>Overflowing with tears, take him by the hand!</l>
<l>The sins I have sinned, turn to a blessing;</l>
<l>the transgressions I have committed may the wind carry away!</l>
<l>Strip off my manifold transgressions as a garment.</l>
<l>O my god, seven times seven are my transgressions; forgive my sins!</l>
<l>O my goddess, seven times seven are my transgressions; forgive my sins!</l>
<l>O god whom I know and whom I know not, seven times seven are my transgressions; forgive my sins!</l>
<l>O goddess whom I know and whom I know not, seven times seven are my transgressions; forgive my sins!</l>
<l>Forgive my sins, and let me humble myself before thee.</l>
<l>May thy heart be appeased as the heart of a mother who has borne children!</l>
<l><q rend='post'>May it be appeased as that of a mother who has borne children, as that of a father who has begotten them!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture VIII. The Myths And Epics.</head>

<p>
A lecture on the myths of Babylonia may perhaps
seem out of place in a course, the subject of which is
Babylonian religion. But religion has its mythology as
well as its theology, and sometimes the mythology has
had a good deal to do with moulding or even creating its
theology. Moreover, the myths of Babylonia were
intimately connected with its worship of the gods.
They all related, so far as we know, to the gods and
spirits, or else, to what Greek theology would have
called heroes and demi-gods. They embody religious
beliefs and practices; they contain allusions to local
cults; above all, they not unfrequently reflect the popular
conception of the divine.
</p>

<p>
Only we must beware of basing theological conclusions
on their unsupported evidence. They have come to us
in a literary form, and students of folk-lore know how
little trustworthy, even for the purposes of the folk-lorist,
a tale is which has undergone literary remodelling. It
is difficult to distinguish in it what is peculiar to the
individual author or the literary circle in which he
moves, and what is really the belief of the people or the
traditional heritage of the past. In fact, all mythology,
whether literary or otherwise, suffers from the mixture
within it of old and modern ideas. The old ideas may
be preserved in it like the fossils in a geological formation,
or they may have been coloured and explained away
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
in accordance with the conceptions of a later age; but in
either case they are mingled with the beliefs and notions
of after generations, which our ignorance necessarily
prevents us from separating with the requisite care. In
dealing with the history of religion, therefore, we ought
to treat the language of a literary myth with extreme
caution, and refrain from drawing any far-reaching inferences
from the statements we find in it.
</p>

<p>
This is more especially true of the literary epics of
ancient Babylonia. They seem to have been numerous;
at all events fragments of a good many have been saved
for us out of the wreckage of the past. But they belong
for the most part to the same period, the age of national
revival which began with the reign of Khammurabi, and
continued for several centuries after his death. It is
possible that Sin-liqi-unnini, the author of the great Epic
of Gilgames, was a contemporary of Abraham; the story
of Adapa, the first man, was already in existence, and
had become a standard classic, when the Tel el-Amarna
letters were written in the fifteenth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Behind
all these poems lay a long-preceding period in which the
myths and legends they embody had taken shape and
formed the subject of numberless literary works. The
Epic of Gilgames is, for instance, but the final stage in
the literary development of the tales and myths of which
it is composed; older poems, or parts of poems, have been
incorporated into it, and the elements of which it consists
are multiform and of various origin. The story of the
Deluge, which constitutes the eleventh book, has been
foisted into it by an almost violent artifice, and represents
a combination of more than one of its many
versions which were in circulation in Babylonia. When
the early libraries of the country have been explored, we
shall know better than we do now how far the story in
the form we have of it in the Epic is original, and how
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
far the author has freely borrowed from his predecessors,
using their language or combining their work.
</p>

<p>
As a rule, the subject of a Babylonian poem is either
some single god or some single hero. When the god or
hero is merely a central figure around whose adventures
those of other gods or heroes are made to revolve, the
poem becomes an Epic. It still retains its mythological
shape, and the world in which it moves is a world of
supernatural powers, a divine fairyland in which the gods
play the part of men. But there is none of the dull and
crass euhemerism which distinguishes the Egyptian tales
of the gods. The gods do not become mere men with
enlarged human powers; they remain divine, even though
their actions are human and the stage on which they
move is human also. It was the pantheism of the
Egyptian, in conjunction with the deification of the
Pharaoh, that made him rationalise the stories of his
gods; in Babylonia there was no such temptation; each
deity retained his individual character, and from the outset
he had worn the likeness of a man. But it was a
likeness only, behind which the divinity revealed itself,
though the likeness necessarily caused the revelation to be
made through individual features, clearly cut and sharply
defined. Bel was no human king possessed of magical
powers, who had once sat on the throne of Babylon; he
remained the god who could, it is true, display himself
at times to his faithful worshippers, but whose habitation
was in the far-off heavens, from which he surveyed and
regulated the actions of mankind. The gods of Babylonian
mythology still belonged to heaven and not to
earth, and its heroes are men and not humanised gods.
</p>

<p>
I have already referred to the story of the first man,
Adapa, and his refusal of the gift of immortality. The
story, as we have it, has received a theological colouring;
like the narrative of the Fall in the Book of Genesis, it
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
serves to explain why death has entered the world.
Man was made in the likeness of the gods, and the
question therefore naturally arose why, like them, he
should not be immortal. The answer was given, at any
rate by the priests of Eridu, in the legend of Adapa and
his journey to the sky.
</p>

<p>
There was yet another story which illustrated the
punishment of human presumption,&mdash;the attempt of man
to be as a god,&mdash;and is thus a parallel to the story of
the tower of Babel. It is the legend of Etana and the
eagle, who tempts the hero to ascend with him to the
highest heavens and there visit the abodes of the gods.
Borne accordingly on the breast of the bird, Etana
mounts upwards. At the end of two hours the earth
looks to them like a mere mountain, the sea like a pool.
Another four hours and <q>the sea has become like a
gardener's ditch.</q> At last they reach <q>the heaven of
Anu</q>; but even there they refuse to stay. Higher still
they ascend to the heaven of Istar, so that the sea
appears to them <q>like a small bread-basket.</q> But before
they can reach their destination the destined penalty
overtakes the presumptuous pair. The eagle's wings fail
him, and he falls through space, and both he and his
burden are dashed to the ground.
</p>

<p>
With this story of Etana there has been coupled a
legend, or rather fable, of the eagle itself, which the
mutilated state of our copies of it renders extremely
obscure. The eagle had devoured the young of the
serpent, who accordingly appealed to the sun-god, the
judge of all things, for justice. By the sun-god's advice
the serpent creeps into the carcase of a dead ox, and
there, when the eagle comes to feed upon the putrifying
flesh, seizes his enemy, strips him of his feathers, and
leaves him to die of hunger and thirst. This must have
happened after the fall of the eagle from heaven; and we
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
may therefore conjecture that, while his human companion
was killed, like Icarus, by the fall, the punishment
of the eagle was deferred. But it came finally;
not even the most powerful of the winged creation could
venture with impunity into the heaven of the gods.
</p>

<p>
While the celestial seat of Istar was beyond the reach
of man, Istar herself sought Tammuz, the bridegroom of
her youth, in the underground realm of Hades, in the
hope that she might give him to drink of the waters of
life which gushed up under the throne of the spirits of
the earth, and so bring him back once more to life and
light. The poem which told of her descent into Hades
was sung at the yearly festival of Tammuz by the women,
who wept for his untimely death. Like Baldyr, the
youngest and most beautiful of the gods, he was cut off
in the flower of his youth, and taken from the earth to
another world. But while the myth embodied in the
poem, and illustrated by numberless engraved seals,
makes him descend into Hades, the older belief of Eridu,
where he had once been a water-spirit,&mdash;<q>the son of the
spirit of the deep,</q>&mdash;transferred him to the heaven above,
where, along with Nin-gis-zida, <q>the lord of the upright
post,</q> he served as warder of the celestial gate. In my
Hibbert Lectures I have dealt so fully with the story of
Tammuz in the various forms it assumed, as well as with
the myth of Istar's pursuit of him in the world below,
that I need not dwell upon it now. All I need do is to
insist upon the caution with which we should build upon
it theories about the Babylonian's conception of the
other world, and the existence he expected to lead after
death.
</p>

<p>
The description of Hades with which the poem begins
was borrowed from some older work. We meet with it
again almost word for word in what is probably one of
the books of the Epic of Gilgames. The fact illustrates
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
the way in which the poets and epic-writers of Babylonia
freely borrowed from older sources, and how the classical
works of Chaldæa were built up out of earlier materials.
Perhaps if reproached with plagiarism, their authors
would have made the same answer as Vergil, that they
had but picked out the pearls from the dunghill of their
predecessors. At all events the description of Hades is
striking, though it must be remembered that it represents
only one of the many ideas that were entertained of it
in Babylonia&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>To the land from which there is no return, the home of [darkness],</q></l>
<l>Istar, the daughter of Sin, [turned] her mind,</l>
<l>yea, the daughter of Sin set her mind [to go];</l>
<l>to the house of gloom, the dwelling of Irkalla,</l>
<l>to the house from which those who enter depart not,</l>
<l>the road from whose path there is no return;</l>
<l>to the house where they who enter are deprived of light;</l>
<l>a place where dust is their nourishment, clay their food;</l>
<l>the light they behold not, in thick darkness they dwell;</l>
<l>they are clad like bats in a garb of wings;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>on door and bolt the dust is laid.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Through the seven gates of the infernal regions did Istar
descend, leaving at each some one of her adornments,
until at last, stripped and helpless, she stood before the
goddess of the underworld. There no mercy was shown
her; the plague-demon was bidden to smite her with
manifold diseases, and she was kept imprisoned in Hades
like the ordinary dead. But while the goddess of love
thus lay bound and buried, things in this upper world fell
into confusion. Neither men nor cattle produced offspring,
and the gods in heaven took counsel what should be
done. Ea accordingly created an androgyne, to whom the
name was given <q>Bright is his light.</q> Before him the
gates of Hades opened, and the darkness within them
was lighted up. The infernal goddess was forced to obey
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
the orders of heaven; and though she cursed the messenger
with deadly imprecations, the spirits of the earth were
seated on their golden throne while Istar was sprinkled
with the water of life, and she then returned once more
to the world of light.
</p>

<p>
Ereskigal, the goddess of Hades, forms the subject of
yet another poem, fragments of which were found at
Tel el-Amarna in Egypt, where the poem had been used
as a text-book for the students of the Babylonian language
and script. The poem recounts how she refused
to come to a feast which the gods had prepared in
heaven, and how Nergal invaded her dominions, broke
through the gates that shut them in, and, seizing Ereskigal
by the hair, dragged her from her throne. But
she begged for mercy, and Nergal consented to be her
husband, and to rule with her over the realm of the
dead. The <q>tablet of wisdom</q> was transferred to him,
and she became a Semitic Baalat, the mere reflection of
her <q>lord.</q> The Sumerian <q>queen of Hades</q> gave place
to a Semitic Bel.
</p>

<p>
The <q>tablet of wisdom</q> was distinct from the <q>tablets
of destiny,</q> which gave their possessor a foreknowledge
of the future course of events. The possession of the
latter implied supreme rule over gods and men; it
brought with it the right to be <q>Bel</q> in the fullest
sense of the word. Like the Urim and Thummim, they
were hung upon the breast; and in the Epic of the
Creation, Tiamât is described as delivering them to her
demon husband Kingu, who thereby became the acknowledged
ruler of the world. The victory of Merodach
over the powers of darkness transferred to him the
mystic tablets; from henceforth he was the Bel who had
made, and who directed, the existing universe; and once
each year, at the New Year's festival, he sat enthroned
above the mercy-seat in his temple at Babylon, declaring
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
the destinies of the coming year. But before the tablets
were given to Bel-Merodach of Babylon, they had belonged
to the older Bel of Nippur and Dur-ili; and a
myth told how Zu, the storm-bird, had stolen them while
Bel was <q>pouring forth the pure water and mounting his
throne</q> at the beginning of day. <q>I will take,</q> he had
said, <q>the divine tablets of destiny, even I; the laws<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Terêti</foreign>, the Heb. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>thôrâh</foreign>. The laws which the gods have to obey are
meant.</note> of
all the gods will I decree; my throne will I establish and
issue my commands, and direct all the angels (of heaven).</q>
The thief flew with his spoil to Mount Sâbu; and Anu
called in vain upon his brother gods to pursue and smite
him, and recover the stolen treasure. It was only at last
by the help of stratagem that the nest of Zu was found,
and the tablets restored to Bel.
</p>

<p>
A myth of more transparent meaning is that which
told of the ravages wrought in land after land by Urra,
the Pestilence. The description of the plague-god reminds
us of that angel of pestilence whom David saw
with his hand stretched forth over Jerusalem. No moral
considerations moved him; just and unjust, the sinner
and the innocent, were alike involved in a common destruction.
Babylon was the first to be smitten, then
Erech; and Merodach and Istar mourned vainly over the
ruin of their people. Then Isum, the angel-messenger
of Urra, was sent on a longer mission. The pestilence
spread over the whole civilised world; Syria and Assyria,
Elamite and Bedâwin, Kurd and Akkadian equally
suffered. The vineyards of Amanus and the Lebanon
were rooted up, and those who cultivated them perished
from the earth. For <q>unnumbered years</q> the scourge
lasted, for Urra had <q>planned evil because of former
wickedness,</q> and it was long before his rage was appeased,
and the world returned to its normal state.
</p>

<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>

<p>
Similarly transparent is the story of the assault of the
seven evil spirits upon the moon, resulting in its eclipse
and threatened extinction. En-lil in despair sends his
messenger, the fire-god, to Ea for advice and help, which
are accordingly given, and the moon-god is saved. The
poem, however, is of a much older date than those we
have hitherto been considering. It goes back to the
time when magic still held a foremost place in the
official religion of Babylonia; when Aṡari, the son of Ea,
had not as yet become Bel-Merodach of Babylon; and
when the cult of Ea had not been obscured by those of
younger deities. In fact, it forms part of one of the
incantation texts, and is described as the sixteenth book
of the series on evil spirits. But the divine triads
already make their appearance in it; Ea does not stand
alone, but shares his powers with En-lil and Anu, while
below them is the triad of Sin, Samas, and Istar. We
may look upon the story as belonging to the age which
saw the transformation of Sumerian animism into the
syncretic State religion of later days; the Semitic gods
are there, but they still retain in part the functions
which distinguished them when they were <q>spirits</q> and
nothing more.
</p>

<p>
Between the legend of the assault upon the moon-god
and the Epic of Gilgames the distance is great. Centuries
of thought and development intervene between them,
and there is a difference not only in degree, but also in
kind. While one reminds us of the legends of Lapps or
Samoyeds, the other finds its parallel in the heroic tales
of Greece. Gilgames is a hero in the Greek sense of the
term; he is not a god, at least for the poet of the Epic,
even though he lived like Achilles and Odysseus in days
when the gods took part in visible form in the affairs of
men. So far as we know, it is the masterpiece of Babylonian
epical literature,&mdash;a proof that however deficient
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
the pure-blooded Semite may have been in epical and
mythological genius, the mixed race of Babylonia was
in this respect the rival of the Greek. Like the story
of the Trojan War, the story of Gilgames attracted to
it epical and mythological elements from all sides,
and became a veritable treasure-house of Babylonian
mythology.
</p>

<p>
Its author divided it into twelve books. Long ago it
was noticed that the arrangement has an astronomical
basis, and that the adventures of the hero described in
some at least of the books are made to correspond with
the current names of the months of the year. Thus the
love and revenge of Istar are the subject of the sixth
book, answering to the name of the sixth month, that of
<q>the mission of Istar</q>; while the episode of the Deluge
is introduced into the eleventh book, where it fitly corresponds
with the eleventh month Adar, <q>the month of
the curse of rain.</q> It is true that the correspondence between
the subject of the book and the name of the month
cannot be traced in all cases, but it must be remembered
that each month had many names, especially in the age
of Khammurabi, and that the poet would have more
especially in his mind the religious festivals which distinguished
the months of the year. As was pointed out
by Sir H. C. Rawlinson, he must have regarded Gilgames,
if not as a solar hero, at all events as a representative of
the sun-god. Not only is the Epic divided into twelve
books, but in the seventh, when the summer solstice is
passed and the year begins to wane, the hero is smitten
with a sore disease. It is not until the twelfth and
last book is reached, that, after bathing in the waters
of the ocean which encircles the world, he is healed
of his sickness, and restored once more to health and
strength.
</p>

<p>
But the solar character of Gilgames did not originally
<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>
belong to him. His name, like those of most of the
Babylonian heroes, had come down from Sumerian times,
when as yet the gods did not exist, and the world of
living things was divided between <q>spirits</q> and men.<note place='foot'>Gilgames seems to mean <q>great father,</q> from <foreign rend='italic'>gilga</foreign>, <q>father,</q> and
<foreign rend='italic'>mes</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>mas</foreign>, <q>great.</q></note>
And Gilgames was a man, the creation of the goddess
Aruru, whose original birthplace seems to have been
Marad, and of whom a tale was told which may be the
prototype of that of Akrisios and Perseus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Anim.</hi> xii. 21. Sokkaros, king of Babylonia, fearing that his
daughter's son would dethrone and slay him, imprisoned her in a tower.
Gilgamos, however, was born to her. By his grandfather's orders he
was thrown from the tower, but saved by an eagle, which caught him
upon its wings. Philologically it is possible to identify Sokkaros and
Akris-ios.</note> He was the
Hêraklês of Babylonia, the embodiment of human strength,
who saves his country from its foes, and destroys the monstrous
beasts that infest it,&mdash;a mighty prince, though not
an actual king. There is no reason why he should not
have been like Cyrus, a historical personage round whose
name and deeds myths afterwards gathered; an early
inscription recording the restoration of the wall of Erech
states that it had been originally built by the deified
Gilgames.<note place='foot'>Hilprecht, <hi rend='italic'>The Babylonian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania</hi>,
i. 15. 26; Hommel in the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi> xvi. pp. 13-15. The
inscription is as follows: <q>The deified Abil-ili(?), father of the army
of Erech, the son of Bel-semea, has restored the walls of Erech, which
were built in old times by the deified Gilgames.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Epic begins with a description of his rule at
Erech, <q>the seat</q> of his power. Between him and the
inhabitants of the city there seems to have been little
goodwill. He had not left, they complained, the son to
his father or the wife to her husband. It may be that
the legend contains a germ of historical truth, and goes
back to the days when Erech was still a battleground
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
between Sumerian and Semite.<note place='foot'>Professor Haupt, however, to whom we owe the <q>editio princeps</q> of
the Epic of Gilgames, believes that the description of the siege of Erech
does not belong to the Epic at all. He finds the beginning of it in the
fragment K 2756 c, generally assigned to the third book of the poem.
See his article on <q>The Beginning of the Babylonian Nimrod Epic</q> in
the <q>Johns Hopkins Semitic Papers</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, xxii. 1 (1901)).</note> At any rate the gods,
we are told, heard the cry of the people, and Aruru was
instructed to create a rival to Gilgames, who might overcome
him in the contest of strength. The goddess
accordingly kneaded clay with her hands, and made it in
the form of Ea-bani, half-man and half-beast. His body
was covered with hair; <q>he knew neither kin nor
country</q>; <q>with the gazelles he ate the grass</q> of the
field, and <q>satisfied his thirst with the cattle.</q> On the
seals he is represented as a satyr with a goat's legs and
human head.
</p>

<p>
Vainly <q>the Huntsman</q> endeavoured to capture him.
Ea-bani broke through the nets that were laid for him;
and it was only when one of the courtesans of Istar was
sent to entice him that he yielded to the temptation, and
left his gazelles and cattle to lie with her seven nights.
When once more he turned back to them, they fled from
him in terror; he had become a man, knowing good and
evil, and between him and the brute beasts there was
nothing more in common. He listened accordingly to
the courtesan, and went with her to Erech, <q>the seat of
Gilgames, the giant in strength, who like a wild ox is
stronger than the strongest men.</q> There Gilgames had
dreamed three dreams relating to him; and Ea-bani, on
hearing the interpretation of them, gave up his design of
wrestling with the hero, and became instead his fast friend
and ally.
</p>

<p>
The third book of the Epic describes the expedition
of the two heroes against the tyrant Khumbaba, whose
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
home was in the cedar-forest of Elam. They found a
way into its magical depths, gazing in wonder at the
height of the trees, and beholding the mountain of the
cedars, <q>the mystic</q> seat of the gods, the shrine of
Irnini; <q>before the mountain the cedars lifted up
their luxuriant foliage; deep was their shadow and full
of pleasaunce.</q> Khumbaba was overcome and slain; but
Gilgames once more dreamed a dream, wherein the
heavens thundered, the lightning flashed, and the earth
shook, and which portended disaster to Ea-bani and his
friend.
</p>

<p>
The sixth and following books describe how the dream
was fulfilled. Istar saw and loved Gilgames in the
strength of his manhood, and asked him to be her bridegroom.
<q>If thou wilt be my husband,</q> she declared&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>I will let thee ride in a chariot of lapis-lazuli and gold,</q></l>
<l>thou shalt harness each day great mules (to thy yoke);</l>
<l>the odours of cedar shall enter our house ...</l>
<l>Kings, lords, and princes [shall bow] at thy feet;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>[the increase] of mountain and plain shall they bring thee in tribute.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Gilgames, however, rejected the offer of the goddess in
scorn, and taunted her with her fickleness and cruelty
and the miserable end of all who had loved her in the
past&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,</q></l>
<l>thou ordainest weeping for him year by year.</l>
<l>The bright-coloured wood-pigeon didst thou love;</l>
<l>thou didst smite him and break his wings;</l>
<l><q rend='pre: none; post: none'>in the woods he sits and cries, <q>O my wings!</q></q></l>
<l>Thou didst love a lion perfect in might;</l>
<l>seven times seven didst thou dig for him a pit.</l>
<l>Thou didst love a horse, glorious in battle;</l>
<l>whip and spur and bridle didst thou decree for him.</l>
<l>Fourteen hours didst thou make him gallop;</l>
<l>weariness and thirst didst thou lay upon him;</l>
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
<l>for his mother, the goddess Silili, thou ordainest weeping.</l>
<l>Thou didst love the shepherd Tabulu,</l>
<l>who poured out the salt continually for thee;</l>
<l>day by day did he slay for thee the sucklings.</l>
<l>Thou didst smite him, and change him into a wolf.</l>
<l>His own shepherd-boys drove him away,</l>
<l>and his own dogs bit his flesh.</l>
<l>Thou didst love Isullanu, the gardener of thy father,</l>
<l>who was ever bringing thee fruit;</l>
<l>day by day he made bright thy dish;</l>
<l>thou didst lift thine eyes to him, and speak softly to him:</l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>Isullanu mine, let us eat the gourds together;</q></q></l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='post'>put forth thine hand and touch one ...</q></q></l>
<l>Isullanu answered her:</l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>Of me what requirest thou?</q></q></l>
<l>Has my mother not baked, have I not eaten,</l>
<l>that I should eat such food?</l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='post'>Thorns and thistles are hidden therein</q></q> (?).</l>
<l>When thou didst hear these his words,</l>
<l>thou didst smite him, and change him into a column (?),</l>
<l><q rend='post'>and didst plant him in the midst of [the garden?].</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Istar flew to her father Anu in heaven, and demanded
from him vengeance upon Gilgames for the slight he had
put upon her. Accordingly a monstrous bull was created,
which ravaged the country, and threatened the life of
Gilgames himself. But Gilgames was more than a
match for the monster. With the help of Ea-bani the
bull was slain, and its huge horns carried in triumph
through the streets of Erech; while Istar stood in impotent
rage on the walls of the city, lamenting the death
of the bull, and calling on her harlot priestesses to weep
over it with her.
</p>

<p>
But the death of <q>the divine bull</q> had evil consequences
for the two heroes. The curse of Istar falls
upon them; Gilgames himself is smitten with a grievous
sickness, and Ea-bani dies after lingering in pain for full
twelve days. Gilgames is inconsolable; vainly he protests
against the law of death which carries away the
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
strong equally with the weak, the hero equally with the
common man. The ninth book thus begins&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Gilgames for his friend Ea-bani</q></l>
<l>weeps bitterly and lies outstretched upon the ground.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>'Shall I not die like Ea-bani?</q></l>
<l>Grief has entered my body;</l>
<l><q rend='post'><q rend='post'>I fear death, and lie outstretched upon the ground.</q></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Accordingly he determines to visit Xisuthros,<note place='foot'>As Berossos has told us what was the pronunciation of the name of
the hero of the Chaldean Deluge, the disputes of modern Assyriologists as
to whether it was Pir-napistim or the like are but labour lost. The true
analysis of the name Xisuthros is still unknown, though it is possible,
but not probable, that George Smith was right in seeing in it a metathesis
of the title Adra-khasis applied to several of the early Babylonian heroes.
Adra-khasis means <q>the very clever,</q> reminding us of <q>Mohammed the
clever</q> in modern Egyptian folk-lore.</note> the hero
of the Deluge, who dwelt beyond the river of death,
whither he had been translated without dying, and learn
from him the secret of immortality.
</p>

<p>
The road was long and difficult; mortal man had
never trodden it before. But there was divine blood in
Gilgames; and as the Greek Hêraklês forced his way
to Hades, so he too forced his way beyond the limits of
our human world. First he had to pass the twin mountains
of Mas, in the northern desert of Arabia, which
guard the daily rising and setting of the sun, whose
summit touches the <q>zenith of heaven,</q> while <q>their
breast reaches downwards to Hades.</q> Men with the
bodies of scorpions guarded the gateway of the sun, the
horror of whose aspect was <q>awesome,</q> and whose look
<q>was death.</q> But <q>the scorpion-man</q> and his <q>wife</q>
recognised that the stranger was partly divine, and he
was allowed to pass in safety through the open doors.
Once beyond them he entered a region of thick darkness.
For the space of twelve double hours he groped
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
his way through this land without light, when suddenly
he emerged from it into the bright light of day. Here
grew a marvellous tree, whose fruit was the precious
turquoise<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>´Samtu</foreign>, Heb. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>shohem</foreign> (Gen. ii. 12).</note> and lapis-lazuli, which hung from it like
clusters of grapes.
</p>

<p>
At last Gilgames reached the shore of the ocean,
which, like a serpent, encircles the earth. Here Ṡiduri,
or Ṡabitum <q>the lady of Saba,</q><note place='foot'>So Hommel, who is probably right in seeing in the word the name of
Saba in Southern Arabia.</note> sat upon <q>the throne
of the sea.</q> But she locked the gate of her palace, and
forbade him to cross the ocean; none had ever passed
over it except the sun-god in his nightly voyage from
west to east. Once more, however, the element of
divinity that was in Gilgames prevailed; Ṡabitum acknowledged
that he was more than a mere man, and
allowed his right to seek his ancestor beyond the river of
death. Arad-Ea, the pilot of Xisuthros, was summoned;
trees were cut and fashioned into a boat, and for a month
and fifteen days Gilgames and his pilot pursued their
voyage over the sea. Then <q>on the third day</q> they
entered <q>the waters of death.</q> The hero was bidden to
cling to the rudder and to see that the deadly water did
not touch his hand. Twelve strokes of the oar were
needed before the rapids were safely passed, and the
boat reached the shore that lay beyond the realm of
death. Here Gilgames beheld Xisuthros <q>afar off</q> <q>at
the mouth of the rivers.</q> At once he communicated to
him the object of his journey: how and why had Xisuthros
escaped the universal law of death? The answer is contained
in the eleventh book of the Epic, which recounts
the story of the great Deluge.
</p>

<p>
Ever since its discovery by George Smith in 1872, the
Babylonian story of the Deluge, which has thus been
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
introduced into the Epic of Gilgames, has attracted the
special attention of both scholars and the public. On
the one side it agrees with the story of the Deluge handed
down to us by the copyists of the Chaldæan historian
Berossos, and so is a witness to his trustworthiness; on
the other side, its parallelism with the account of the
Deluge in the Book of Genesis is at once striking and
startling. But the version of the story embodied by
Sin-liqi-unnini in his Epic was but one out of many that
were current in Babylonia. We have a fragment of
another which so closely resembles that of the Epic, as to
have been long believed to form part of it; indeed, it is
possible that it comes from a variant copy of the Epic
itself. Fragments of another version have lately been
found by Dr. Scheil in a Babylonian tablet which goes
back to the reign of Ammi-zadok, the fourth successor of
Khammurabi.<note place='foot'>Zimmern, indeed, has suggested that this latter text belongs to the
legend of Atarpi, which, however, has unfortunately come down to us in
so mutilated a condition that no certain interpretation of it is possible.
The discoverer of the tablet is more probably right in connecting it with
the story of the Flood.</note> Even the version contained in the Epic
seems to be a combination of two earlier ones, or rather
to be based upon at least two different versions of the
legend. The story, in fact, must have been of immemorial
antiquity in Babylonia; Xisuthros and his ship are
depicted upon some of the earliest seals, and Babylonian
chronology drew a sharp line of division between the
kings who had reigned before and after the Flood. In
the Epic Xisuthros is a native of Surippak on the
Euphrates, but the story must originally have grown up
at Eridu on the shores of the Persian Gulf. Like the
story of the struggle with Tiamât, it typifies the contest
between the anarchic elements of storm and flood and
that peaceful expanse of water in which the fishermen of
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
Eridu plied their trade, and out of which the culture-god
had ascended. It is significant that up to the last it was
En-lil of Nippur who was represented as sending the Flood
that destroyed mankind, while Xisuthros was saved by Ea.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonian story of the Deluge has been so often
translated and is so well known, that there is no need
for me to repeat it here. It is sufficient to note that
Xisuthros, like Noah, owed his preservation to his piety.
In the final scene, when Bel (En-lil) is enraged that
any one should have escaped from the destruction he
had brought upon mankind, Ea pacifies him with the
words: <q>Punish the sinner for his sins, punish the transgressor
for his transgressions; be merciful that he be not
[utterly] cut off, be long-suffering that he be not [rooted
out].</q> The Deluge was a punishment for sin, and it was
only just, therefore, that the righteous man should be
saved.
</p>

<p>
The translation of Xisuthros with his wife to the
paradise beyond the grave is evidently regarded by the
author of the Epic as a further reward for his piety.
But we may suspect that this was not its original cause.
In the myth of Adapa, the first man, we find Anu laying
down that the mortal who has penetrated into the secrets
of the gods must receive the gift of immortality and become
as one of the gods himself, and it would seem that
the same idea inspired the belief in the translation of the
second father of mankind. Xisuthros too had learned
the secret counsels of the gods; with the help of Ea he
had outwitted Bel, and it was therefore needful that the
gift of immortality should be conferred on him, and that
he should dwell like them in the land which death cannot
reach.
</p>

<p>
True to his primeval character, En-lil of Nippur was
the author of the Deluge. His ministers, Nin-ip, Nusku,
and En-nugi, carry out his commands, while <q>the spirits
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
of the earth lift up their torches.</q> But the poet of the
Epic has spoilt the primitive symmetry of the picture by
introducing the triad into it along with the storm-god
Hadad of later times, and so making the destruction of
mankind not the work of En-lil alone, but of the gods
generally in common council. The result has been a
want of coherence in the elements of the story; Istar<note place='foot'>Who here takes the place of Aruru.</note>
consents to the death of the children she has borne, only
to repent of it subsequently when she sees them filling
the sea <q>like fish,</q> and to weep with the rest of the gods
over the havoc that has been wrought. Perhaps Professor
Jastrow is right in his suggestion that two separate
versions of the story have been united together, in one
of which it was the single city of Surippak and its inhabitants
that were destroyed, while in the other the
Deluge was universal. However that may be, Ea disclosed
the determination of En-lil to his faithful servant,
<q>the son of Ubara-Tutu.</q> According to one part of the
story, the disclosure was made through a dream; according
to another part, by a device similar to that which gave the
Phrygian Midas his ass's ears. The god whispered the
meditated deed of Bel and the means of escaping it to one
of those reed-huts which stood by the shore of the Persian
Gulf, and in which Xisuthros&mdash;despite the fact that he
is called <q>a man of Surippak</q>&mdash;was born. The rustling
reeds communicated to him the secret, and he in turn
told his <q>lord Ea</q> that he had understood the message.
</p>

<p>
The ship was built, and by the advice of Ea the too-inquisitive
inquirers were informed that the builder was
transferring his allegiance from Bel, the lord of the land,
to Ea, the god of the sea.<note place='foot'>The words <q>I will no longer dwell in your city, and turn my face
toward the ground of En-lil,</q> imply that Surippak was not far from
Nippur.</note> All sorts of provisions were
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
stored in it, together with <q>the seed of life,</q> each after
its kind&mdash;<q>cattle of the field, wild beasts of the field, and
the sons of the craftsmen.</q> Then the helm was placed
in the hands of Buzur-Sadi-rabi, the steersman, the door
of the ark was closed, and the storm broke upon the
earth. For seven days and nights it raged; man and
his works were swept away, and the ark alone survived
with its living freight. When at last Xisuthros
opened his window and looked out, a desolate waste of
waters was all that could be seen. Above it the lofty
peak of the mountain of Nizir<note place='foot'>The mountain of Nizir was in the country called Lulubi or Luluwi
by the Assyrians, Lulu in the Vannic inscriptions. In the bilingual
inscription of Topzawa, Lulu is made the equivalent of the Assyrian
Urardhu, the Hebrew Ararat.</note> in the north-east finally
appeared; here the ship grounded, and seven days afterwards
Xisuthros sent forth a dove to see if the earth
were dry. But the dove <q>went to and fro, and returned.</q>
Next he sent forth a swallow, which returned also to the
ark; and lastly a raven, which <q>ate, waded and croaked,
and did not return.</q> So the Chaldæan Noah knew that
the waters of the Flood had subsided: and accordingly he
opened the door of the ark and let the animals within it
depart towards <q>the four quarters of heaven.</q> Then he
offered sacrifice on the summit of the mountain, setting
beside it vases of smoking incense ranged <q>seven by
seven.</q> The gods smelt the sweet savour of the offering,
and rejoiced that there were men still left to prepare it
for them. They gathered, we are told, <q>like flies above
the offerer,</q> while Beltis lifted up <q>the bow that Anu
had made.</q>
</p>

<p>
En-lil alone refused to be reconciled. He vented his
wrath at the escape of Xisuthros and his family upon
the Igigi or angels, who, as spirits, were more under his
control than the gods. But Ea took the blame upon
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>
himself, and, after declaring that the righteous must not
suffer with the guilty, persuaded Bel to promise that
though he might send the wild beast, the famine, and the
pestilence upon mankind, the earth should never again
be visited by the waters of a flood. Then Bel entered
the ship, blessed Xisuthros and his wife, and translated
them to the other world.
</p>

<p>
After hearing the story, Gilgames fell into a deep sleep,
which lasted six days and seven nights, while the wife of
Xisuthros prepared magic food, which she placed at the
head of the sleeper. When he awoke he ate it, and his
sickness departed from him. But his skin was still
covered with sores, and it was therefore necessary that
he should bathe in the purifying waters of the ocean
before the full strength and beauty of his youth came
back to him.
</p>

<p>
Xisuthros now tells him of the plant of immortality
which grows, covered with thorns, at the bottom of the
ocean. The hero accordingly ties heavy stones to his
feet, and dives for it; and though the thorns pierce his
hands, he brings a branch of it to the surface, and prepares
to carry it to the world of men. But the gift of
immortality was not for men to possess. On his voyage
home Gilgames stops awhile at a fountain of cool water,
and while he bathes in it a serpent perceives the odour
of the plant, and steals it away. Vainly the hero laments
its loss, the plant that <q>changes age into youth </q> could
never be brought to a world the law of which is death.
</p>

<p>
Man must die, but what is the lot of the dead? This
is the question which forms the burden of the twelfth
and last book of the Epic. Gilgames wanders from
temple to temple, asking the god of each if the earth
has seized hold of Ea-bani, and if so, what is his fate
below. But the gods are silent; they give neither
answer nor sign. At last, however, he reaches the shrine
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
of Nergal, the god of the dead, and Nergal causes the
earth to open and the spirit of Ea-bani to ascend out of
it like a cloud of dust. And then the answer is given.
He who has friends to care for him will <q>lie on a couch
and drink pure water</q>; the hero too&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>who is slain in battle, as you and I have seen,</q></l>
<l>his father and his mother support his head,</l>
<l>and his wife [weeps] over him.</l>
<l>But he whose body lies forsaken in the field, as thou and I have seen,</l>
<l>his ghost rests not in the earth.</l>
<l>He whose ghost has none to care for him, as thou and I have seen,</l>
<l>the garbage of the pot, the refuse of food,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>which is thrown into the street, must he devour.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
With this dreary and materialistic picture of the other
world the Epic comes to an end. It is a curious contrast
to the life in the fields of Alu to which the Egyptian
worshipper of Osiris looked forward; and there is
little need to wonder that the mind and religious cult of
the Babylonian should have been centred in the present
life. The Hades in which he was called upon to believe
was more dreary even than the Hades of the Homeric
Greeks.
</p>

<p>
The Epic of Gilgames forces two questions upon our
attention, both of which have been often discussed. The
one is the relation of the story of the Deluge contained
in it to the Biblical narrative of the Flood, the other is
the relation of Gilgames himself to the Greek Hêraklês.
From the outset it has been perceived that the connection
between the Babylonian and Hebrew stories is very close,
and that the Babylonian is the older of the two. The
birds, for instance, sent out by Xisuthros are three
instead of two, as in the Biblical narrative, though the
number of times they were despatched is the same in
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>
both cases; and the ship of the Babylonian version has
been replaced by an ark in the Old Testament account.
In fact the Babylonian story has been modified in
Palestine and under Western influences. In an inland
country an ark was naturally substituted for a ship,
more especially as the latter contained a house with
window and door; even in Babylonia itself, in the processions
of the gods, an ark came to take the place of
the ship of primitive Eridu. The olive branch, again,
with which the dove returned, according to the Book of
Genesis, points to Palestine, where the olive grew; while
the period of the rainfall has been transferred from Sebet
or January and February, when the winter rains fall in
Babylonia, to the <q>second month</q> of the Hebrew civil
year, our October and November, when the <q>former
rains</q> began in Canaan. Similarly, the subsidence of the
waters is extended in the Hebrew narrative to the middle
of the <q>seventh month,</q> when the <q>latter rains</q> of the
Canaanitish spring are over.
</p>

<p>
But the most remarkable fact brought to light by a
comparison of the Babylonian story with that of Genesis
is, that the resemblances between them are not confined
to one only of the two documents into which modern
criticism has separated the Biblical narrative. It is not
with the so-called Elohistic, or the so-called Yahvistic,
account only that the agreement exists, but with both
together as they are found at present combined, or
supposed to be combined, in the Hebrew text.<note place='foot'>See my <hi rend='italic'>Early History of the Hebrews</hi>, p. 122 sqq.</note> The
fact throws grave doubt on the reality of the critical
analysis. As I have said elsewhere:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Loc. cit.</hi>, p. 126.</note> <q>Either the Babylonian
poet had before him the present <q>redacted</q> text
of Genesis, or else the Elohist and Yahvist must have
copied the Babylonian story upon the mutual understanding
<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
standing that the one should insert what the other
omitted. There is no third alternative.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Palestinian colouring of the Biblical version of
itself excludes the supposition that the story was borrowed
by the Jews in the age of the Babylonian exile.
Such a supposition, indeed, would be little in accordance
with the feelings of hatred felt by the captives towards
their Babylonian conquerors and the religious beliefs
and traditions of the latter. But the discovery of the
Tel el-Amarna tablets has shown that the culture and
literature of Babylonia had made its way to Palestine
and even to Egypt long before the Mosaic age. The
great literary works of Chaldæa were already known and
used as text-books in the West, and, like the story of the
first man Adapa, a portion of which was found in Egypt,
the story of the Deluge and the second founder of the
human race must also have been known there. Gunkel
has made it clear<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit</hi> (1895).</note> that the conceptions and beliefs which
underlie the history of the Flood, and find their expression
in the statement that <q>the fountains of the great deep</q>
were broken up, are not only of Babylonian origin, but
are also met with in the earliest fragments of Old
Testament literature. Before the Israelites entered
Canaan, the cosmological ideas of Babylonia had already
made their way to it, and been adapted to the geographical
conditions of <q>the land of the Amorites.</q>
</p>

<p>
The story of a deluge was known to Greece as well as
to Palestine. There, too, it had been sent by Zeus as a
punishment for the impiety of mankind; and Deukalion,
the Greek Noah, saved himself and his family in a ship.<note place='foot'>It should be noticed that, as the voyage of Xisuthros lasted for a
Babylonian week of seven nights, so the voyage of Deukalion lasted for a
Greek week of nine days. Ogyges is but a local variant of Deukalion.</note>
The peak of Parnassos played the same part in the
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
Greek legend that the mountain of Nizir played in the
Babylonian; and the stones thrown on the ground by
Deukalion which became men, remind us of the images
of clay moulded by the goddess Mami in the mutilated
Babylonian myth of Atarpi, which similarly become men
and women.
</p>

<p>
But it is not so much with the episode of the Deluge
as with the whole story of Gilgames and his adventures
that Greek mythology claims connection. The desire of
finding the biblical Nimrod in the cuneiform tablets
long seduced Assyriologists into the impossible attempt
to identify him with Gilgames; it is not, however, to
the Biblical Nimrod, but to the Greek Hêraklês, that the
Babylonian hero is related. The curious parallelism
between the twelve labours of Hêraklês and the twelve
adventures of Gilgames may be an accident; but it is
no accident that Gilgames and Hêraklês should alike be
heroes who are not kings, and that both alike should be
tormented with a deadly distemper which destroyed the
flesh. Khumbaba is the tyrant Geryon, the bull slain
by Gilgames is the Kretan bull slain by Hêraklês, and
the Nemæan lion reappears in the lion which Gilgames
is so often represented on the seals as strangling to
death. As Hêra persecuted Hêraklês, so Istar persecuted
Gilgames; the journey of the Greek hero into Hades is
paralleled by the journey of Gilgames beyond the waters
of death; and the tree which he found on the shores of
the sea with its fruit of precious stones is the magical
tree of the Hesperides with its golden apples which grew
in the midst of the western ocean.
</p>

<p>
It is true that there are many elements in the legend
of Hêraklês which are not derived from Babylonia. But
it is also true that, like the cosmogonies of Hesiod or
the cosmological philosophy of Thales, there are also
elements in it for which we must claim a Babylonian
<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
origin. Probably they made their way to Greek lands
at the same time as the Cyprian cult of Aphroditê or
the myth of Adônis, whose name indicates the road
along which the culture of Babylonia had travelled.
Recent archæological discoveries have revealed the fact
that in the days when Canaan was a Babylonian province,
a civilisation already existed in the Ægean, and that an
active intercourse was carried on between Egypt and
Asia on the one hand, and the islands and shores of the
Mediterranean on the other, in which Krete took a
leading share. Light is only just dawning on what
until lately was the <q>prehistoric</q> past of the European
peoples; before long a new world will doubtless be
disclosed to us, such as that which the decipherment of
the cuneiform texts has brought to light.
</p>

<p>
It is not only in the mythology of primitive Greece
that we can trace the influence of the legends embodied
in the Epic of Gilgames. The adventures of Gilgames
in search of immortality form part of the story of that
mythical Alexander who grew up in literature by the
side of the Alexander of history. He too had to make
his way through a land of thick darkness, and he too
finally failed in his endeavour to secure the <q>waters of
life.</q><note place='foot'>See Meissner, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander und Gilgamos</hi> (1894).</note> Man is and must remain mortal; this is alike
the teaching of the old poet of Chaldæa and of the
romance which the contact of Eastern and Western
thought called into existence in classical days.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture IX. The Ritual Of The Temple.</head>

<p>
The temple of the god was the centre and glory of every
great Babylonian city. The Babylonian States had been
at the outset essentially theocratic; their ruler had been
a high priest before he became a king, and up to the
last he remained the vicegerent and adopted son of the
god. It was round the temple that the city had grown
and its population clustered. The artisans worked for
it, and the agricultural labourers tilled its fields. The
art of Babylonia originated within the temple precincts;
it was for its adornment that the enamelled tiles were
first made, and wood or stone or metal carved into
artistic shapes, while the endowments which thus fostered
the craftsman's art were derived from landed property
or from the tithes paid to the priests upon the produce
of the soil. The culture of Babylonia was with good
reason traced back to the god Ea.
</p>

<p>
The place occupied in Assyria by the army was filled
in Babylonia by the priesthood. The priests could make
and unmake their kings. The last monarch of Babylonia,
Nabonidos, was a nominee of the priests of Babylon; it
was from them, and not from the rights of heritage, that
he had derived his title to the throne. The great
sanctuaries of the country influenced its destinies to the
last. The influence of Nippur and Eridu, in fact, was
wholly religious; we know of no royal dynasties that
sprang from them. Even Nabonidos, with all his
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
centralising zeal on behalf of Merodach of Babylon, was
constrained to lavish gifts and honours on the sun-god
of Sippara, at all events in the early part of his reign.
</p>

<p>
We must therefore look upon the temple as the oldest
unit in the civilisation of Babylonia. Babylonian culture
begins with the temple, with the worship of a deity or
a spirit, and with the ministers attached to the cult.
Centuries before En-lil of Nippur had developed into a
Semitic Bel, an earthly dwelling-house had been provided
for him which became in time the temple of a god. Its
first name, Ê-kur, <q>the house of the earth</q> or <q>mountain,</q>
continued always to cling to it, even though the
original meaning of the name was forgotten, and it had
come to signify a temple in the later sense of the word.
</p>

<p>
The temple was the sign and token of the reclamation
of the primitive Babylonian swamp. Before it could be
erected, it was needful to construct a platform of solid
earth and brickwork, which should rise above the
pestiferous marsh, and serve as a foundation for the
building. The Sumerians called the platform the ki-gal
or <q>great place</q>; it was the first place of human or
divine habitation wrested from the waters of the swamp,
and it marked the triumph of civilised man over nature.
Emphatically, therefore, it was a <q>great place,</q> a solid
resting-place in a world of water and slime.
</p>

<p>
On the platform the temple buildings were piled.
There was no stone in Babylonia; it was a land of mud,
and of mud bricks, accordingly, baked in the sun, the
temple of the god was constructed. What was lost in
beauty or design was gained in solidity. The Babylonian
temples were huge masses of brick, square for the most part,
and with the four corners facing the four cardinal points.
It was only exceptionally that the four sides, instead of
the four corners, were made to front the four <q>winds.</q>
</p>

<p>
These masses of brick were continually growing in
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
height. The crude bricks soon disintegrated, and the
heavy rains of a Babylonian winter quickly reduced
them to their primeval mud. Constant restorations
were therefore needed, and the history of a Babylonian
temple is that of perpetual repairs. Efforts were made
to keep the walls from crumbling away by building
buttresses against them, and the bricks were cemented
together with bitumen. But all precautions were in
vain. A period of national decay inevitably brought
with it the decay also of the temples, and a return of
prosperity meant their restoration on the disintegrated
ruins of the older edifice. The artificial platform became
a <foreign rend='italic'>tel</foreign> or mound.
</p>

<p>
But the growth in height was not displeasing to the
priestly builders. The higher the temple rose above the
level of the plain, the better they were pleased. A
characteristic of the Babylonian temple, in fact, was the
<foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> or <q>tower</q> attached to each, whose head it was
designed should <q>reach to heaven.</q> The word <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign>
means a <q>lofty peak,</q> and the royal builders of Babylonia
vied with one another in making the temple towers
they erected as high as possible.
</p>

<p>
There was more than one reason for this characteristic
feature of religious Babylonian architecture. The first
settlers in the plain of Babylonia must soon have discovered
that the higher they could be above the surface
of the ground the better it was for them. The nearer
they ascended to the clouds of heaven, the freer they
were from the miasmata and insects of the swamp.
The same cause which led them to provide a platform
for their temples, would have also led them to raise the
temple as high as they could above the level of the
plain. This, however, will not explain the origin of the
tower itself. It would have been a reason for building
the temple as high as possible, not for attaching to it a
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
tower. Nor was the tower suitable for defence against
an enemy, like the pylons of an Egyptian temple. At
most it was a convenient watch-tower from which the
movements of a hostile band could be observed. There
must have been some other reason, more directly connected
with religious beliefs or practices, which found its
outward expression in the sacred tower.
</p>

<p>
The sanctuary of Nippur, it will be remembered, was
the oldest in Northern Babylonia. And from time immemorial
it had been known as Ê-kur, <q>the house of
the mountain-land.</q> It represented that underground
world which was the home of En-lil and his ghosts; and
this underground world, we must observe, was conceived
of as a mountain. In fact, the cuneiform character which
signifies <q>country</q> also signifies <q>mountain,</q> and the
hieroglyphic picture out of which it developed is the
picture of a mountain-range. The land in which it was
first drawn and stereotyped in writing must, it would
seem, have been a mountainous one, like the land in
which the subterranean realm of En-lil was regarded as
a lofty hill. In other words, the Sumerians must have
been the inhabitants of a mountainous country before
they settled in the plain of Babylonia and laid the
foundations of the temple of Nippur.
</p>

<p>
And this mountainous country lay to the north or
east, where the mountains of Elam and Kurdistan border
the Babylonian plain. In the story of the Deluge the
ark is made to rest on the summit of the mountain of
Nizir, which is probably the modern Rowandiz, to the
north-east of Assyria; and the gods were believed to have
been born in <q>the mountain of the world,</q> in the land
of Arallu.<note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 360-363, where the various passages
relating to the Babylonian Olympos are quoted.</note> Here, too, they held their court; <q>I will
ascend into heaven,</q> the Babylonian monarch is made
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>
to say in the 14th chapter of Isaiah, <q>I will exalt my
throne above the stars of El; I will sit also upon the
mount of the assembly (of the gods), in the extremities
of the north;<note place='foot'>The land of Arallu or Hades.</note> I will ascend above the heights of the
clouds; I will be like the Most High.</q> More than one
temple in both Babylonia and Assyria took its name from
this <q>mountain of the world</q>; the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> at Kis was
known as <q>the house of the mountain of mankind,</q>
while a temple at Ur was entitled <q>the house of the
mountain,</q> and the shrine of Gula at Babylon was <q>the
house of the holy hill.</q><note place='foot'>This, however, is rather the <q>holy mound</q> of waters, in which Ea
had his home, than the inland mountain of En-lil.</note>
</p>

<p>
All over Babylonia, accordingly, the mountain is
brought into close connection with the religious cult.
Not at Nippur only, but in other cities as well, the home
of the gods is on the summit of an Olympos, within
whose subterranean recesses they were born when as yet
the primitive ghost or spirit had not become a god.
Sumerian religion must have grown up rather among the
mountains than in the plain, and the memory of its
birthplace was preserved by religious conservatism. The
<foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> of the temple goes back to the days when the
gods were still gods of the mountain, and the builders
of the temple sought to force a way into the heavenly
Olympos by raising artificially an imitation of the
mountain on the alluvial plain. The tower was a mimic
representation of the Ê-kur, or mountain of the earth
itself, where En-lil, <q>the god of the great mountain</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>sadu rabu</foreign>), had his seat. And the earth could have
been figured as a mountain only by the inhabitants of a
mountainous land.
</p>

<p>
But this conception of the world of gods and men
stands in glaring contrast to the cosmology of Eridu.
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
There the primeval earth was not a mountain peak, but
the flat lands reclaimed from the sea. The gods and
spirits had their home in the abysses of the ocean, not
in the dark recesses of a mountain of the north; the
centre of the world was the palace of Ea beneath the
waves, not <q>the mountain-house</q> of En-lil, or the dark
caverns of <q>the mountain of Arallu.</q> Once more we
are confronted by a twofold element in Babylonian
thought and religion, and a proof of its compound
nature. Like the contradictory elements in Egyptian
religion, which can best be explained by the composite
character of the people, the contradictory elements in
Babylonian religion imply that mixture of races which is
described in the fragments of Berossos.
</p>

<p>
In the tower or <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign>, accordingly, we must see a
reflection of the belief that this nether earth is a mountain
whose highest peak supports the vault of the sky.
Around it float the stars and clouds, concealing the
heaven of the gods from the eyes of man. But this
Olympian heaven was really an afterthought. It was
not until the ghosts of the lower world had developed
into gods, and been transferred from the heart of the
mountain to its summit, that it had any existence at all.
It belongs to the age of astro-theology, to the time
when the moon and sun and host of heaven became
divine, and received the homage of mankind. This is an
age to which I shall have to refer again in my next and
concluding lecture. It was the time when the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign>
began to consist of seven storeys, dedicated to the seven
planets, when the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> of Erech was called <q>the
house of the seven black stones,</q> and that of Borsippa,
<q>of the seven zones of heaven and earth.</q><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Ur</foreign> is the Sumerian word for <q>zone.</q> It is translated by <foreign rend='italic'>arâru</foreign>, <q>to
bind</q>; <foreign rend='italic'>etsêdu</foreign>, <q>to bind the sheaves</q> for harvest; and <foreign rend='italic'>khamâmu</foreign>, <q>to
bind</q> or <q>fix</q> laws.</note>
</p>

<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>

<p>
The <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> occupied but a small part of the temple
area. What the temple was like we know to a certain
extent, not only from the American excavations at
Nippur, but more especially from the accounts given us
by Herodotos and by a cuneiform tablet which describes
the great temple of Bel-Merodach at Babylon. The
latter was called Ê-Saggila, <q>the house of the exalted
head</q>; and though the account of Herodotos is probably
quoted from an earlier author, while the cuneiform
tablet, which was seen and translated by Mr. George
Smith at Constantinople, has unfortunately been lost,
there is nevertheless no ground in either case for mistrust.
The description given by Herodotos fully agrees
with that of the tablet.
</p>

<p>
The visitor to the temple first entered the <q>Great</q> or
Outer Court. It was 900 feet in breadth, and more
than 1150 in length. If we may judge from the
analogy of Nippur and Lagas, an arcade ran round its
interior, supported on columns, and two larger, but
detached, columns of brick or stone stood on either side
of the entrance. At Babylon a second court opened out
of the first, devoted to the worship of the goddesses Istar
and Zamâmâ. Six gates pierced the walls&mdash;the Grand
Gate, the Gate of the Rising Sun, the Great Gate, the
Gate of the Colossi, the Gate of the Canal, and the Gate
of the Tower-view.<note place='foot'>From Mr. Smith's words it is difficult to determine whether the gates
were in the first or second court, or whether (as seems the more probable)
the tablet intended us to understand that the gates belonged to both
courts.</note> Then came the <foreign rend='italic'>kigallu</foreign>, or platform,
of the original temple, the sides, and not the corners of
which faced the four cardinal points, and which possessed
four gates, each in the centre of a side. In it was the
<foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign>, <q>the house of the foundation of heaven and
earth,</q> as it was termed, with its seven stages, which
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
rose one above the other in gradually diminishing proportions
to a height of 300 feet.<note place='foot'>The first stage was 300 feet square and 110 feet high, while the topmost
was 80 feet long by 70 broad and 50 high.</note> A winding ramp led
upwards on the outside, connecting the stages with each
other, and allowing a chariot to be driven along it to
the top. Here in the last of the seven stages was the
chamber of the god. It contained no image of the
deity, only a couch of gold and a golden table for the
shewbread.<note place='foot'>For the shewbread, see Zimmern, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss der babylonischen
Religion</hi>, pp. 94, 95; and Haupt, <q>Babylonian Elements in
the Levitic Ritual,</q> p. 59 (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of Biblical Literature</hi>, 1900). Sometimes
six dozen cakes were laid before the god, sometimes three dozen,
more often only one dozen, as among the Israelites. The shewbread is
called <foreign rend='italic'>akal pani</foreign>, which is the exact equivalent of the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>lekhem
happânîm</foreign>; and Professor Haupt has pointed out that it was required to
be unleavened (<foreign rend='italic'>mutqu</foreign>).</note> None but a woman into whom the god
had breathed the spirit of prophecy was allowed to enter
it, and it was to her that Bel revealed himself at night
on his golden couch and delivered his oracles. As in
Greece, so too in Babylonia and Assyria, women were
inspired prophetesses of the gods. It was from the
priestesses and serving-women of Istar of Arbela that
Esar-haddon received the oracles of the goddess; and
we are reminded that in Israel also it was the prophetess
Deborah who roused her countrymen to battle,
and Huldah, rather than Jeremiah, to whom the high
priest betook himself that he might hear <q>the word of
the Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is significant that the place of the oracle was
the topmost chamber of the tower. The god is
conceived as coming down from heaven;<note place='foot'>Cp. Gen. xi. 5.</note> it is there
that he lives, not in the underground recesses of the
mountain of the world or fathomless abysses of the
sea. When the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> took its final shape, the
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
deities of Babylonia had already been transported to
the sky.
</p>

<p>
It is also significant that there was no image of the
god. The spiritual had been finally separated from the
material, and where the god himself came in spiritual
form no material image of him was needed. Though
none might be able to see him with mortal eye save
only his inspired priestess, he was nevertheless as
actually present as if he had embodied himself in some
statue of metal or stone. The denizen of heaven required
no body or form of earthly make; the divine
spirits who were worshipped in the sun or stars were
seen only by the eye of faith.
</p>

<p>
But it was in the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> only that the deity thus
came down from heaven in spiritual guise. In the
chapels and shrines that stood at its foot images were
numerous; here the multitude, whether of priests or
laymen, served and worshipped, and the older traditions
of religion remained intact. On the eastern side of the
tower was the sanctuary of Nebo, the <q>angel</q> or interpreter
of the will of Merodach, with Tasmit, his wife.
To the north were the chapels of Ea and Nusku, and to
the south those of Anu and En-lil, while westward was
the temple of Merodach himself. It consisted of a
double building, with a court between the two wings.
In the recesses of the inner sanctuary was the <foreign rend='italic'>papakhu</foreign>,
or <q>Holy of Holies,</q> with its golden image of the god.
Here too was the golden table of shewbread and the
<foreign rend='italic'>parakku</foreign>, or mercy-seat, which at times gave its name to
the whole shrine.
</p>

<p>
The innermost sanctuary was known as the Du-azagga,
or <q>Holy Hill,</q> after which the month Tisri received one
of its names.<note place='foot'>The Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>du</foreign> has, of course, nothing to do with the Semitic Babylonian
<foreign rend='italic'>dû</foreign>, <q>a chapel</q> (unless, indeed, the latter is borrowed from the
Sumerian word). It is properly the equivalent of <foreign rend='italic'>tilu</foreign>, <q>a mound</q> or
<q>hill</q>; but as the <foreign rend='italic'>tilu</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tel</foreign> was generally inhabited, it came further to
acquire the signification of <foreign rend='italic'>subtu</foreign>, <q>a dwelling-place.</q></note> But the name had really come from
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
Eridu. It was the dwelling-place of Ea on the eastern
horizon of the sea, where the sun rises from the deep,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 50. i. 5; 41. 1, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> 18.</note>
and Asari accordingly was entitled its <q>son.</q> When
Asari became Merodach of Babylon, the Holy Mound or
Hill migrated with him, and the seat of the oracular
wisdom of Ea was transformed into the shrine of Merodach,
where he in his turn delivered his oracles on the
festival of the New Year.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, note 1.</note> Lehmann<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Samassumukin</hi>, ii. pp. 47-51. Nebuchadrezzar calls the Du-azagga,
<q>the place of the oracles of the Ubsu-ginna, the mercy-seat of destinies,
which on the festival of the New Year (Zag-muku), on the eighth and
eleventh days,</q> Bel announces before the assembled gods. Jensen (<hi rend='italic'>Kosmologie
der Babylonier</hi>, pp. 239-242) first pointed out that the Ubsu-ginna
was <q>the assembly-place</q> of the gods, which was located in or upon
Ê-kur, <q>the Mountain of the World</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 63. 17.). It thus
corresponds with <q>the mount of the Assembly</q> of Isa. xiv. 13, and
illustrates the combination of the theology of Eridu with that of
Nippur.</note> has shown that
originally it represented the mercy-seat, the <q>golden
throne</q> of the description of Herodotos, above which the
deity seated himself when he descended to announce the
future destinies of man. It was only subsequently that
it was extended to the <q>Holy of Holies</q> in which the
mercy-seat stood.
</p>

<p>
A golden altar seems to have been raised close to the
mercy-seat of the god. If Herodotos may be trusted,
lambs only were allowed to be sacrificed upon it. But
there was another and larger altar in the outer court.
On this whole sheep were offered, as well as frankincense.
</p>

<p>
The architectural arrangement of a Babylonian temple,
however, was not always the same. The orientation of
the temple of Merodach, as we have seen, differed from
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
that of the majority of the Babylonian sanctuaries. The
number of chapels included within the sacred precincts
varied greatly, and even the position of the great tower
was not uniform. But the general plan was alike everywhere.
There was first the great court, open to the sky,
and surrounded by cloisters and colonnades. Here were
the houses of the priests and other ministers of the
temple, the library and school, shops for the manufacture
and sale of votive objects, even the stalls wherein the
animals were kept that were intended for sacrifice. In
the centre of the court stood an altar of sacrifice, with
large vases for the purposes of ablution by the side of it,
as well as a <q>sea,</q> or basin of water, which derived its
name from the fact that it was a symbol of the primeval
<q>deep.</q> The basin was of bronze or stone, and was at
times supported on the backs of twelve oxen, as we learn
from an old hymn which describes the construction of
one of them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 23, No. 1, translated in my Hibbert Lectures, p. 495.</note> At other times, as at Lagas, the basin
was decorated with a frieze of female figures, who pour
water from the vases in their outstretched hands.<note place='foot'>De Sarzec, <hi rend='italic'>Découvertes en Chaldée</hi>, pp. 216, 217.</note> The
purifying effects of the water of the <q>deep</q> were transferred
to that of the mimic <q>sea,</q> and the worshipper
who entered the temple after washing in it became ceremonially
pure.
</p>

<p>
The great court, with its two isolated columns in front
of the entrance, led into a second, from the floor of which
rose the <foreign rend='italic'>ziggurat</foreign> or tower. The second court formed
the approach to the temple proper, which again consisted
of an outer sanctuary and an inner shrine.
Whether the laity were admitted into its inner recesses
is doubtful. No one, indeed, could appear before the god
except through the mediation of a priest; and on the
seal-cylinders a frequent representation is that of a
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
worshipper whom the priest is leading by the hand and
presenting to the image of a deity. But it is not certain
that the image represented on them was that which
stood in the Holy of Holies, or innermost shrine; it
may have been a second image, erected in another
part of the temple. On the other hand, the numerous
chapels of the secondary gods who formed the court
of the chief deity of a city, can hardly have been
furnished with more than one statue, and it is even
questionable whether they consisted of more than one
chamber. Perhaps it was only from the topmost
room of the tower that the layman was absolutely
excluded.
</p>

<p>
The Babylonian temple, it will be seen, thus closely
resembled the temple of Solomon. That, too, had its
two courts, its chambers for the priests, its sanctuary,
and its Holy of Holies. Both alike were externally
mere rectangular boxes, without architectural beauty or
variety of design. It was only in the possession of a
tower that the Babylonian temple differed from the
Israelite. They agreed even in the details of their
furniture. The two altars of the Babylonian sanctuary
are found again in the temple of Jerusalem; so too are
the mercy-seat and the table of shewbread. Even the
bronze <q>sea</q> of Solomon, with its twelve oxen, is at
last accounted for; it was modelled after a Babylonian
original, and goes back to the cosmological ideas which
had their source in Eridu. Yet more striking are the
twin pillars that flanked the gateway of the court, remains
of which have been found both at Nippur and at
Tello. They are exactly parallel to the twin pillars
which Solomon set up <q>in the porch of the temple,</q>
and which he named Yakin and Boaz. In these, again,
we may find vestiges of a belief which had its roots in
the theology of Eridu. When Adapa, the first man, was
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
sent by Ea to the heaven of Anu, he found on either
side of the gate two gods clothed in mourning, and weeping
for their untimely removal from the earth. Like
the two cherubim who guarded the tree of life, they
guarded the gate of heaven. One of them was Tammuz,
the other Nin-gis-zida, <q>the lord of the firmly planted
stake.</q> Each had perished, it would seem, in the prime
of life, and hence were fitly set to guard the gates of
heaven and prevent mortal man from forcing his way
into the realm of immortality. Yakin, it should be
noticed, is a very passable translation of the Sumerian
Nin-gis-zida; perhaps Boaz preserves, under a corrupted
form, a reminiscence of Tammuz.
</p>

<p>
There was yet another parallelism between the temples
of Babylonia and Jerusalem. The Hebrew ark was
replaced in Babylonia by a ship. The ship was dedicated
to the god or goddess whose image it contained, and was
often of considerable size. Its sides were frequently
inlaid with gems and gold, and it always bore a special
name. One at least of the names indicates that the
ship goes back to the days when as yet the gods had not
assumed human forms; the ship of Bau is still that of
<q>the holy cow.</q> In early times the ship was provided
with captain and crew; later, it was reduced in size so
that it could be carried like an ark on the shoulders of
men. But its original object is clear. On days of
festival the god was rowed in it on the sacred river,
where he could enjoy the cool breeze, and return, as
it were, to the <q>pure</q> waters of the primeval deep.
Gradually it became merely his travelling home when he
left his usual dwelling-place. In Assyria its place was
even taken by a throne or platform borne upon the
shoulders in the religious processions. The ship, in
fact, passed into an ark, the curtained palanquin or
shrine wherein the deity could conceal himself from
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
the eyes of the profane when he left his own
sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
A discovery made by Mr. Hormuzd Rassam in the
mounds of Balawât, some fifteen miles from Mossul,
shows that in Assyria the development of the ship into
the ark was as complete as it was in Israel. Here he
found a small chapel dedicated to the god of dreams.
At the entrance of the sanctuary was a stone coffer,
which contained two small alabaster slabs thickly
covered with cuneiform writing. They proved to be
records of the conquests of Assur-nazir-pal, the builder of
the chapel, and each tablet contained the same text. It
was not surprising that the native workmen when they
opened the coffer believed that they had discovered the
veritable tables of the Mosaic Law! We are told in the
Old Testament that the latter were kept in the ark.
Not far from the coffer in the north-west corner of the
shrine was a stone altar the ascent to which was by a
flight of five steps.
</p>

<p>
The temples were served by an army of priests. At
the head came the <foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign> or <q>high priest,</q> who in the
early days of Babylonian history performed the functions
of a king. But the <foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign> was essentially the vicegerent
of the god. The god delegated his powers to him, and
allowed him to exercise them on earth. It was the
doctrine of priestly mediation carried to its logical conclusion.
Only through the priest could the deity be
approached, and in the absence of the deity the high
priest took his place. At Babylon, as we have seen, the
divine rights were conferred by an act of adoption; the
vicegerent of Bel, by <q>taking the hand</q> and becoming
the son of the god, acquired the right to exercise his
sovereignty over men. An early king of Erech calls
himself the son of the goddess Nin-ṡun. From the
outset the Babylonian monarchy was essentially theocratic;
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
the king was simply the high priest in a new
form.
</p>

<p>
But with the rise of Semitic supremacy the king himself
became a god. The vicegerent had taken to himself
all the attributes of the deity, the adopted son succeeded
to the rights and powers of his divine father. The
<foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign> ceased to be the king himself, and became instead
his viceroy and lieutenant. Wherever the supreme
monarch had a governor who acted in his name, he had
also a representative of his divine authority. There
were high priests of the god on earth as well as of the
gods in heaven.
</p>

<p>
A new term was wanted to take the place of <foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign>,
which had thus come to have a secular as well as a
religious signification. It was found in <foreign rend='italic'>sangu</foreign>, which,
more especially in the Assyrian period, meant a chief
priest. Every great sanctuary had its chief priests who
corresponded to the Hebrew <q>sons of Aaron,</q> with a
<q>high priest</q> or <foreign rend='italic'>sangam-makhu</foreign> at their head.<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>sangu</foreign> was called <foreign rend='italic'>êbar</foreign> in Sumerian, with which the name of Eber
in Gen. xi. 15 may possibly be compared.</note> Under
them were a large number of subordinate priests and
temple ministers&mdash;the <foreign rend='italic'>kali</foreign> or <q>gallos-priests,</q><note place='foot'>Not <q>astrologers,</q> as has sometimes been supposed. <foreign rend='italic'>Kalû</foreign> is borrowed
from the Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>kal</foreign>, as <foreign rend='italic'>makhkhû</foreign> is from <foreign rend='italic'>makh</foreign>. At their head was the
<foreign rend='italic'>abba-kalla</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>aba-kul</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>ab-gal</foreign>, a word which under the first form is used
as a proper name in early Babylonian texts. Assyrian colonists carried it
to Kappadokia, and Strabo accordingly tells us that the high priest of
Komana was called Abaklês. A Hellenised form of the title, Bakêlos, is
given by Hesychius, who renders it by <q>the grandee</q> and <q>the gallos-priest</q>
(see my note in the <hi rend='italic'>Proc. SBA.</hi> xxiii. p. 106). <foreign rend='italic'>Abgal</foreign> is stated to
be the equivalent not only of the borrowed Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>abkallu</foreign>, but also of
<foreign rend='italic'>bil terti</foreign>, <q>master of the law</q>; <foreign rend='italic'>khassu</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>imqu</foreign>, <q>the learned one</q> (like
the Arabic <foreign rend='italic'>'alim</foreign>); and <foreign rend='italic'>mar ummani</foreign>, <q>the craftsman</q> or <q>professional</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 13. 37-42). The relation of <foreign rend='italic'>kalû</foreign> to <foreign rend='italic'>gallu</foreign> (Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>kal</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>galla</foreign>), <q>a servant,</q> is not yet clear, though it must be remembered that
the <foreign rend='italic'>gallos</foreign> was the <q>servant</q> of Kybelê. On the use of <foreign rend='italic'>kal</foreign>, <q>servant</q> in
the Sumerian texts, see Reisner, <hi rend='italic'>Tempelurkunden aus Telloh</hi>, pp. 20, 21.</note> the
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>niṡakki</foreign> or <q>sacrificers,</q> the <foreign rend='italic'>ramki</foreign> or <q>pourers of
libations,</q> and the <foreign rend='italic'>pasisi</foreign> or <q>anointers with oil.</q> There
was even a special class of bakers who made the sacred
cakes that were used in the temple service, as well as
<q>chanters</q> and <q>wailers,</q> <q>carriers of the axe</q> and
<q>of the spear.</q> Above all, there were the prophets
and augurs, the soothsayers (<foreign rend='italic'>makhkhi</foreign>) and necromancers
(<foreign rend='italic'>musêli</foreign>), and those who <q>inquired</q> of the dead
(<foreign rend='italic'>saili</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
The <foreign rend='italic'>asipi</foreign> or <q>prophets</q> constituted a class apart. In
some respects they resembled the prophets of Israel. It
was <q>by order of the college of prophets</q> that Assur-bani-pal
purified the shrines of Babylon after the capture
of the city, and the prophet accompanied even an army
in the field. At times they predicted the future; more
often it was rather an announcement of the will of
Heaven which they delivered to mankind.<note place='foot'>So in a text quoted in my Hibbert Lectures, p. 81, <q>like Bel on the
mercy-seat of the destinies the prophecy shall be uttered, this shall be
said: <q>Bel has come forth, the king has looked after me.</q></q> A special
class of <q>prophets</q> bore the name of <foreign rend='italic'>masmas</foreign> (whence <foreign rend='italic'>masmasu</foreign> in
Assyrian), which is translated <foreign rend='italic'>mullilu</foreign>, <q>the praiser</q> of the gods (Heb.
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hillêl</foreign>).</note> As they
prophesied they poured out libations; hence it is that
the purification of the shrines of the Babylonian temples
was their special care, and that an old ritual text commands
the prophet to pour out libations <q>for three days
at dawn and night during the middle watch.</q><note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, p. 79.</note> The
word was borrowed by the writer of the Book of Daniel
(ii. 10) under the form of <foreign rend='italic'>ashshâph</foreign>, which the Authorised
Version renders <q>astrologers.</q> But the Babylonian <foreign rend='italic'>asip</foreign>
or <q>prophet</q> was not an astrologer; he left to others
the interpretation of the stars, and contented himself
with counselling or foretelling the destinies of men. Like
his master Bel-Merodach, he was the interpreter of the
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
wisdom of Ea, and the revealer of his counsels. The
Holy of Holies in the great temple of Babylon, where Bel
uttered his oracles, was known as the <q>house of prophecy,</q>
like the ship also in which the image of the god was
ferried across the stream.<note place='foot'>Ê-kua and Mâ-Kua, <foreign rend='italic'>bit-assaputi</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>elip-assaputi</foreign> in Semitic. Jastrow
mistranslates <q>dwelling-house</q> instead of <q>oracle</q> or <q>prophecy</q>; the
true meaning of the word was already discovered by Oppert in the early
days of cuneiform decipherment.</note> The prophet may have been
part of the heritage bequeathed by Eridu to the Babylonian
people.
</p>

<p>
By the side of the prophet stood the seer (<foreign rend='italic'>sabrû</foreign>).<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>sabrû</foreign> was distinct from the <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign>, whose name seems to have a more
general signification, and Professor Haupt is probably right in regarding
it as the <foreign rend='italic'>shaphel</foreign> form of the latter. He gives <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign>, however, too wide a
meaning when he makes it denote a <q>diviner</q> of every kind and sort.
It is true that magic was taken under the ægis of Babylonian theology,
and that just as the <foreign rend='italic'>asipi</foreign> or <q>prophets</q> might be made to include the
<q>enchanters</q> and <q>pronouncers</q> of spells, so the <foreign rend='italic'>bari</foreign> might include
those who sought to divine the future by examining the entrails of victims
or by means of a cup (cp. Gen. xliv. 5). But, properly speaking, the <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign>,
like the <foreign rend='italic'>sabrû</foreign>, <q>revealed</q> the future by means of dreams. Haupt's correction
of <foreign rend='italic'>baddîm</foreign> into <foreign rend='italic'>bârîm</foreign>, <q>diviners,</q> in Isa. xliv. 25 and Jer. l. 36, is
brilliant (<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Elements in the Levitic Ritual</hi>, p. 57). The Sumerian
equivalent of <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign> is <hi rend='smallcaps'>Khal</hi> (or more correctly <foreign rend='italic'>âkhal</foreign>); that of <foreign rend='italic'>sabrû</foreign>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pa-al</hi>,
where <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pa</hi> means <q>the official.</q></note>
The seer and the prophet were distinct from one another;
there was no confusion between their offices, as seems to
have been at one time the case in Israel. The seer was
not the <q>speaker</q> who declared the will of the gods or
the fate that was decreed for man; it was, on the contrary,
through visions and trances that the future was
made known to him. Assur-bani-pal tells us how, on
the eve of the Elamite war, after he had invoked the
aid and protection of Istar, <q>a seer slept and dreamed a
prophetic dream; a vision of the night did Istar reveal
unto him; he repeated it to me, saying: <q>Istar, who
dwelleth in Arbela, came down, and on the right hand and
<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
on the left hung (her) quivers; in her hand she held
the bow; she drew the sharp war-sword and held it
before her. Like a mother she speaketh with thee, she
calleth thee; Istar, the queen of the gods, appointeth
for thee a doom: ... <q>Eat food, drink wine, make
music, exalt my divinity, until I march and this work
of mine be accomplished. I will give thee thy heart's
desire; thy face shall not grow pale, thy feet shall not
totter.</q></q></q>
</p>

<p>
Here the message of the seer passes into a prophecy,
and his office is distinguished from that of the prophet
only through the difference in the mode of revelation.
The seer went back to the earliest ages of Semitic Babylonia.
The <q>seer</q> of the palace of Sargon of Akkad is
already mentioned on a contemporaneous tablet by the
side of <q>the king</q> and <q>the queen.</q><note place='foot'>Thureau-Dangin, <q>Tablettes chaldéennes inédites,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Assyriologie</hi>, iv. 3, pl. xiii. 40, <hi rend='italic'>Obv.</hi></note> Like the other
priests among whom he was reckoned, it was necessary
that he should be without bodily blemish. The leper,
the blind, and the maimed were excluded from the
service of the gods.<note place='foot'>So too was a person of illegitimate birth, as has been pointed out by
Haupt (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of Biblical Literature</hi> (1900), p. 57).</note>
</p>

<p>
How far the Babylonian prophet resembled the Hebrew
prophet it is at present impossible to say. But there
were certainly two important points in which they
differed. The Babylonian prophet was, on the one side,
a member of the priestly body; the mere peasant could
not become an <q>utterer</q> of the will of heaven without
previous training and consecration. There was, consequently,
no such distinction between the prophet and
the priest as prevailed in Israel; Babylonia was a theocratic,
not a democratic State. On the other side, the
prophet was closely linked with the magician and necromancer.
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
Magic had been taken under the protection of
the State religion, not repudiated and persecuted as
among the Israelites. Hence, while the prophet was a
priest to whom the rites of purification were specially
entrusted, he was at the same time classed with the <foreign rend='italic'>sailu</foreign>
who <q>inquired</q> of the dead, the <foreign rend='italic'>musêlu</foreign> or necromancer,
and the <foreign rend='italic'>makhkhu</foreign> or <q>soothsayer.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, there were prophetesses as well as
prophets in both Babylonia and Israel. The employment
of women in the temple services peculiarly characterised
Babylonia. As we have seen, it was a woman only who
was privileged to enter the secret shrine of Bel-Merodach
at Babylon; while unmarried women were consecrated,
not only to Istar, but also to the sun-god, and, like the
priests, formed a corporate community. We are told
that in the lower world of Hades there were female as
well as male soothsayers; it was the home of the black
art, and so reflected the constitution of the professors of
sorcery in the upper world.
</p>

<p>
Along with the seer and the soothsayer, the prophet
was thus annexed by the temple. A definite duty was
assigned to him there; he was <q>the pourer out</q> of
libations. The libations were doubtless originally of
<q>pure</q> water, to which was subsequently added wine,
whether made from the palm or the vine. Along with
the libations all the first-fruits of the cultivated land were
offered to the gods. Milk and butter and oil, dates and
vegetables, were given in abundance. So too were the
spices and incense that were brought from the southern
coast of Arabia, the corn that was grown in the fields,
garlic and other herbs from the garden, and honey from
the hive. But animal sacrifices were not forgotten.
Oxen and calves, sheep and lambs, goats and kids, fish
and certain kinds of birds, were slain upon the altar, and
so presented to the gods. It is noticeable that it was
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
only the cultivated plant and the domesticated beast
that were thus offered to the deity. The dog and swine,
or rather wild boar, are never mentioned in the sacrificial
lists. What man gave to heaven was what he ate himself,
and reared or grew with the sweat of his brow.
The gazelle, indeed, is named, but it is a scape-goat
which is driven into the desert like the Hebrew Azazel,
carrying away with it the sins and sickness of those who
let it loose.<note place='foot'>J. D. Price in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental Society</hi>, xxi. 2,
pp. 1-22. In the hemerology published in <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 32, the animal
mentioned in col. 1, line 3, is not a gazelle, as I have supposed in my
Hibbert Lectures, p. 70, but a <q>goat</q> (Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>sikku</foreign>, Assyrian
<foreign rend='italic'>sapparu</foreign>).</note> The gods of Semitic Babylonia were essentially
human, and what man lived upon they too required.
They had, moreover, given their worshippers all they
most needed and prized&mdash;fruitful fields, fat cattle, rain in
its season, and the blessings of the sunshine. In return
they demanded the first-fruits of what was in reality
their own; they could, if they so chose, deprive man of
the whole, but they were generously satisfied with a part.
The Semitic Baal was indeed like a divine king; lord
and master though he was of the cultivated soil and
of all that it produced, he was content only with a
share.
</p>

<p>
Was the firstborn of man included among the sacrifices
that were deemed acceptable to heaven? Years
ago I published an early text which seemed to show
that such was the case. My interpretation of the text
has been disputed, but it still appears to me to be the
sole legitimate one. The text is bilingual in both
Sumerian and Semitic, and therefore probably goes back
to Sumerian times. Literally rendered, it is as follows:
<q>Let the <foreign rend='italic'>algal</foreign> proclaim: the offspring who raises his
head among men, the offspring for his life he must give;
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
the head of the offspring for the head of the man he
must give, the neck of the offspring for the neck of the
man he must give, the breast of the offspring for the
breast of the man he must give.</q><note place='foot'>There is no question here of a scape-goat or anything similar. The
word <q>offspring</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>uritsu</foreign>, which is the regular equivalent of Bir
<q>suboles.</q> The addition of the words <foreign rend='italic'>sa amiluti</foreign>, <q>of mankind,</q> confines
it in this case to man. Already, in 1875, in my <hi rend='italic'>Elementary Assyrian
Grammar</hi> (p. 123), I pointed out that it was connected with the Arabic
warats, which I see (like many other things of the same sort) has recently
been announced as a new discovery. The verb <foreign rend='italic'>ittadin</foreign>, by the way,
is an Iphteal, not a Niphal, and therefore cannot be translated as a
passive.</note> It is difficult to
attach any other meaning to this than that which makes
it refer to the sacrifice of children.
</p>

<p>
The question, however, is really settled by the evidence
of archæology. On the famous stela of the Vultures,
now in the Louvre, a sort of wicker-work cage is
represented, filled with captives who are waiting to be
put to death by the mace of the king.<note place='foot'>De Sarzec, <hi rend='italic'>Découvertes en Chaldée</hi>, iv. 1, pl. 4 <hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>. This was in the
time of king E-anna-du. A bas-relief of the time of Entemena on the
same plate, 5 <hi rend='italic'>bis</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>3b</hi>), represents what may also be a human sacrifice, one
naked captive lying on the ground already slain, while another is being
led to execution.</note> On a certain
class of seal-cylinders, moreover, a scene is engraved
which Ménant seems to me to have rightly explained
as depicting a human sacrifice. In later times, it is
true, human sacrifice ceased to be practised; there are
few, if any, references to it in the inscriptions, and the
human victim is replaced by an ox or sheep. It was to
the offended majesty of the Assyrian king rather than
of the god Assur that the Assyrian conqueror impaled or
burnt the beaten foe; and among the lists of offerings
that were made to the deified rulers of Babylonia, we
look in vain for any mention of man or child. As in
Israel, so too in the kingdoms of the Euphrates and
<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
Tigris, human sacrifice seems to have disappeared at an
early date.
</p>

<p>
So, moreover, does another custom which has been
revealed to us by the archaic sculptures of Tello. That
was the custom of approaching the deity stripped of
clothing;<note place='foot'>References are given in Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>,
p. 666.</note> and Professor Jastrow aptly compares with it
not only the scanty dress of the Mohammedan pilgrims
on Mount Arafat, but also Saul's conduct when the
spirit of prophecy fell upon him. A similar custom prevailed
in Keltic Ireland, and the Hindu still strips
himself when he sits down to eat.
</p>

<p>
The growth of culture, and it may be also the mixture
of races, thus deprived the gods of two of the prerogatives
they had once enjoyed. They could no longer claim the
firstborn of men, nor require that the worshipper should
enter their presence naked and defenceless. But they
retained all their other kingly rights. A tithe of all
that the land produced was theirs, and it was rigorously
exacted, for the support of the temples and priests.
Babylonia, in short, was the inventor of tithe.
</p>

<p>
Why it should have been a tenth we cannot say.
The numerical system of the Babylonians was sexagesimal
and duodecimal, not decimal, and the year consisted of
twelve months, not of ten. Perhaps the institution went
back to a period when the year of twelve months had
not yet been fixed, and, like the lunar year of the modern
Mohammedan, it still possessed but ten months. However
this may be, the tithe became a marked characteristic
of Babylonian religious life. It was paid by all
classes; even the king and his heir were not exempt
from it. One of the last acts of the crown prince Belshazzar
was to pay the tithe, forty-seven shekels in
amount, due from his sister to the temple of the sun-god
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
at Sippara, at the very moment when Cyrus was knocking
at the gates of Babylon.<note place='foot'>The tithe was paid on the 5th of Ab; on the 16th of Tammuz, nineteen
days earlier, Gobryas had entered Babylon with the soldiers of
Cyrus.</note> It is probable that the daily
sacrifices were provided for in great measure out of the
tithe; at all events, Assur-bani-pal tells us that after the
suppression of the Babylonian revolt, he levied upon the
people the provision needed for the sacrifices made to
Assur and Beltis and the gods of Assyria. They were,
however, often endowed specially; thus Nebuchadrezzar
made special provision for the daily sacrifice of eight
lambs in the temple of Nergal at Cuthah; and an earlier
king of Babylonia describes how he had increased the
endowment of the stated offerings at Sippara.
</p>

<p>
The daily sacrifice was called the <foreign rend='italic'>ṡatttûku</foreign>, a term which
goes back to the age when the Semite was first mingling
with the older Sumerian.<note place='foot'>A more comprehensive term was <foreign rend='italic'>ginû</foreign>, <q>the fixed offering,</q> which
included not only the daily sacrifices, but all other stated sacrifices as
well.</note> There were other terms in use
to denote the various kinds of offering that were presented
to the gods. The animal sacrifice had the name
of <foreign rend='italic'>zîbu</foreign>, the meal-offering being known as manitu.<note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, p. 72, note 2.</note> The
free-will offering was <foreign rend='italic'>nidbu</foreign>; the <q>gift</q> or <q>benevolence</q>
demanded by the god upon the produce of the field being
<foreign rend='italic'>qurbannu</foreign>, the Hebrew <foreign rend='italic'>qorbân</foreign>. Other terms also were
employed, the exact sense of which is still uncertain;
among them is one which probably means <q>trespass-offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is impossible not to be struck by the many points
of similarity between the Babylonian ritual and arrangement
of the temples and that which existed among the
Israelites. The temple of Solomon, in fact, was little
more than a reproduction of a Babylonian sanctuary.
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
And just as the palace of the Hebrew king adjoined the
temple in which he claimed the right of offering sacrifice,
so too at Babylon the palace of Nebuchadrezzar&mdash;who,
it must be remembered, was a pontiff as well as a
king&mdash;stood close to the temple of Merodach. Even
the bronze serpent which Hezekiah destroyed finds its
parallel in the bronze serpents erected in the gates of the
Babylonian temples.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> i. 65, ii. 19-21; 54. iii. 48-50. See Trumbull, <hi rend='italic'>The
Threshold Covenant</hi>, pp. 110, 116.</note> The internal decoration of the
sanctuary, moreover, was similar in both countries. The
walls were made gorgeous with enamelled bricks, or
with plaques of gold and bronze and inlaid stones.
Sometimes they were painted with vermilion, the
monsters of the Epic of the Creation being pictured
on the walls. But more often the painted or sculptured
figures were, as at Jerusalem, those of cherubim and the
sacred tree or other vegetable devices. At Erech, bull-headed
colossi guarded the doors.
</p>

<p>
But the resemblance between the Babylonian and
Hebrew rituals extends beyond the ceremonial of the
temple of Solomon into the Levitical Law. In fact,
the very term for law, the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>torâh</foreign>, as the Israelites called
it, was borrowed from the Babylonian <foreign rend='italic'>tertu</foreign>, as was first
pointed out by Professor Haupt. It is even a question
whether the word is not a derivative from the verb
<foreign rend='italic'>ahâru</foreign>, <q>to send</q> or <q>direct,</q> from which the name of
Aaron was also formed. However this may be, even
the technical words of the Mosaic Law recur in the
ritual texts of early Babylonia. The biblical <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kipper</foreign>,
<q>atonement,</q> is the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>kuppuru</foreign>; and the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>qorbân</foreign>,
as we have seen, is the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>qurbannu</foreign>. A distinction
was made between the offerings of the rich and of
the poor (<foreign rend='italic'>muskînu</foreign>),<note place='foot'>Cp. Lev. v. 7, 11.</note> and the sacrificial animal was required
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
to be <q>without blemish</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>salmu</foreign>). The <q>right</q>
thigh or shoulder of the victim was given to the priest,
along with the loins and hide, the rump and tendons, and
part of the stomach.<note place='foot'>Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Elements in the Levitic Ritual</hi>, pp. 60, 61.</note> Still more interesting is it to find
in the ritual of the prophets instructions for the sacrifice
of a lamb at the gate of the house, the blood of which
is to be smeared on the lintels and doorposts, as well as
on the colossal images that guarded the entrance.<note place='foot'>Zimmern, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Babylonischen Religion</hi>, p. 127.</note> To
this day in Egypt the same rite is practised, and when
my dahabiah was launched I had to conform to it. On
this occasion the blood of the lamb was allowed to fall
over the sides of the lower deck.
</p>

<p>
There are other parallels between Babylonia and
Mosaic Israel which have been brought forward by Professor
Zimmern. In the <q>Tabernacle of the Congregation,</q>
or <q>Tent of meeting,</q> he sees the place where
<q>the proper time</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>moêd</foreign>, Assyr. <foreign rend='italic'>adannu</foreign>) for an undertaking
was determined by the <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign> or seer; at any rate,
<q>to determine the proper time</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>sakânu sa adanni</foreign>) was
one of the functions of the Babylonian seer.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>L.c.</hi>, p. 88, note 2.</note> By the
side of the rituals for the seers and prophets, moreover,
there was another for the <foreign rend='italic'>zammâri</foreign> or <q>singers.</q> The
hierarchy of a Babylonian temple was, in short, the same
as that of Israel.
</p>

<p>
But in addition to the architecture of the temple and
the regulations of the ritual, there were yet other
resemblances between the religious law of Babylonia
and that of the Israelites. They may be traced in the
numerous festivals of the calendar, and the time of year
at which they were held. Foremost among them was
the festival of the New Year. Babylonia was primarily
an agricultural community, and the festivals of its gods,
<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
like the names of the months, were determined by the
necessities of agriculture. Spring and autumn were
marked by the sowing of the seed and the garnering
of the harvest. But neither the one nor the other
took place in all parts of the country at the same time
of the year. In the south the harvest might be gathered
in when the corn was sown in the north, or the seed
sown when in colder regions the harvest was gathered
in.
</p>

<p>
Hence it was that the same festival might commemorate
either the beginning or the end of the agricultural
year. But in either case it was a period of rejoicing
and rest from labour, of thanking the gods for their
benefits, and offering them the first-fruits of the field.
In the old days of Gudea of Lagas the year commenced
with the festival of the goddess Bau in the
middle of October; in the later Babylon of Khammurabi
the feast was transferred to the spring, and the
first month of the year began in March. But the older
calendar of Babylonia had been already carried to the
West, and there preserved in a country to whose climatic
and agricultural conditions it was really inapplicable.
The ancient Canaanitish year began in the autumn in
what the later calendar reckoned the seventh month.
It was not, however, till after the final unification of the
country under Khammurabi that a fixed and uniform
calendar was imposed upon all the sanctuaries of Babylonia.
At an earlier epoch the great sanctuaries had
each its own calendar; the months were variously
named, and the deities to whom the festivals were dedicated
were not always the same.<note place='foot'>On the early Babylonian calendar, see Radau, <hi rend='italic'>Early Babylonian
History</hi>, pp. 287-307.</note> At Lagas it was Bau
to whom the festival of the New Year was sacred; at
Babylon it was Merodach.
</p>

<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>

<p>
Besides the festivals of the spring and autumn, there
was yet a third festival belonging to the agricultural
year. This was the feast of the summer solstice, which
fell in the month of June. It marked the drying up of
the soil and the disappearance of the crops and vegetation
of the spring. In some of the early States of
Babylonia it was consecrated to a god Bil-'si;<note place='foot'>The real reading of the god's name is unknown. He was identified
with Nin-ip (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 57. 68), the sun of the south (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 57. 51),
and therefore the midday sun&mdash;not the morning sun, as has recently been
maintained. Nin-ip was the messenger or <q>angel</q> of El-lil of Nippur,
and consequently Bil-'si is further identified with <q>the moon of Nippur</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> 57. 56), the angel of the lord of the ghost-world being more
properly the moon than the sun. When Bel-Merodach of Babylon
usurped the functions of El-lil, Bel-'si naturally became Nebo, <q>the
power of strength</q> (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> v. 43. 37), who stood in the same relation to
Merodach that Nin-ip did to El-lil. Bil-'si was also the seventh of the
<foreign rend='italic'>tikpi</foreign>-stars (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 49. 10-13, iii. 50-52).</note> in the
calendar of Assyria, Tammuz took the place of the older
god. Tammuz had perished by an untimely death, and
it was fitting that the death of the god should be celebrated
when nature also seemed to die. There was a
time, however, when the festival of Tammuz had been
observed, at all events in some parts of Babylonia, in
October rather than in June. The same month that
had witnessed the feast of the New Year witnessed also
that of Tammuz risen again from the dead.
</p>

<p>
The three great feasts of the Babylonian agriculturist
are found again in Canaan. But it is noticeable that
the third of them&mdash;the feast of Weeks, as it was called
by the Hebrews&mdash;was there the correspondent of the
spring festival in Babylonia. It was, in fact, a repetition
of the festival of spring. And the latter accordingly
becomes a prelude and anticipation of it. On the 16th
of Nisan the Levitical Law ordered a sheaf of the first-fruits
of the harvest to be presented (Lev. xxiii. 10-14),
and the unleavened bread eaten at the festival itself
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
symbolised the ingathering of the corn which was thus
dedicated to God in the form of consecrated cakes.
</p>

<p>
The three great agricultural festivals were supplemented
by others. Many of these occurred at fixed
times of the year, and commemorated the divinities
worshipped in one or other of the sanctuaries of Babylonia.
Some of them were observed throughout the
country; others only in a particular city and district.
With the deification of a new king came a new festival
in his honour; and if his cult lasted, the festival continued
also by the side of the established festivals of
the older gods. But new festivals might further be
instituted for other reasons. The building or restoration
of a sanctuary, or even the dedication of a statue, was
a quite sufficient pretext. When Gudea consecrated the
temple of Inguriṡa at Lagas, he tells us how he had
<q>remitted penalties and given presents. During seven
days no service was exacted. The female slave was
made the equal of her mistress; the male slave was
made the equal of his master; the chief and his subject
have been made equal in my city. All that is evil
I removed from this temple.</q><note place='foot'>Amiaud's translation in <hi rend='italic'>Records of the Past</hi>, new ser., ii. pp. 83,
84.</note>
</p>

<p>
The temporary freedom thus granted to the slave
seems to have been a characteristic of the Babylonian
festival. Berossos stated that in the month of Lôos or
July, the feast of Sakæa was celebrated at Babylon for
five days, when it was <q>the custom that the masters
should obey their domestics, one of whom is led round
the house clothed in a royal garment.</q><note place='foot'>Athenæus, <hi rend='italic'>Deipnosophist</hi>, 14.</note> The custom
has often been compared with that which prevailed at
the Roman Saturnalia, and a baseless theory has recently
been put forward connecting with it the Hebrew feast of
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
Purim.<note place='foot'>The most obvious derivation of the Hebrew Purim is that which I
have proposed in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>,
xix. 7, pp. 280, 281, little as it may suit certain fashionable hypotheses.
On the Black Obelisk (175), Shalmaneser says: <q>For the second time
the Pûr-festival of Assur and Hadad I celebrated</q>; and a deed of sale
(Rm. 2. 19) is dated in the eponymy of Bel-danan, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 734, <q>in the
year of his Pûr-office</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>ina sanê puri-su</foreign>). Pur, which is interpreted <q>a
lot,</q> has naturally no connection with the Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>bur</foreign>, which is stated
to mean <q>a stone.</q> That we must read <foreign rend='italic'>bur</foreign> and not <foreign rend='italic'>pur</foreign>, is shown by
the variant spelling <foreign rend='italic'>ba-ar</foreign> (Sa 5. iv. 10).</note> But the custom was really the exaggeration in
the Greek age of Babylonian history of the old doctrine
which underlay the Babylonian conception of a holy day.
A holy day was essentially a holiday, a day when the
whole people rested from work, and when, accordingly,
even the slave recovered for awhile his freedom. The
summer feast of Sakæa, at least in its original form, or
the festival ordained by Gudea at the consecration of
the temple of Ê-Ninnu, was thus a parallel to the Hebrew
year of Jubilee. In the year of Jubilee we have the
western reflection of beliefs and usages that were familiar
to the ancestors of Abraham.
</p>

<p>
The Sabbath-rest was essentially of Babylonian origin.
The word Sabbath itself was borrowed from Babylonia,
where it had the form Sabattu, and was derived by the
native lexicographers from the Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>sa</foreign>, <q>heart,</q> and
<q><foreign rend='italic'>bat</foreign>, to cease,</q> and so explained as <q>a day of rest for
the heart.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> ii. 32. 16. The reading of Delitzsch and myself has been called
in question, the tablet having apparently been damaged since we examined
it, but all doubts have now been set at rest by K 93037, <hi rend='italic'>Obv.</hi> 24 (published
in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts</hi>, xii. 6), where <foreign rend='italic'>sabattum</foreign> is the equivalent of a
Sumerian <q><emph>the</emph> day</q> <foreign rend='italic'>par excellence</foreign>. Babylonia was the home of astronomy
and of the sacredness of the number seven, due to the fact that there were
seven planets, so that a seventh-day Sabbath was natural there.</note> The derivation is, of course, absurd, but
it indicates the antiquity of the term. There was yet
another name, <foreign rend='italic'>sulum</foreign>, or <q>quiet day,</q> which was more
especially used as a translation of the Sumerian <foreign rend='italic'>udu</foreign>
<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>khul-gal</foreign>, <q>dies nefastus,</q> on which it was unlawful or
unlucky to perform certain kinds of work.<note place='foot'>Compare the Rabbinical phrase, <q>soiling the hands,</q> applied to the
inspired books of Scripture.</note> Thus, in a
list of what we should call the Saints' days in the month
of the Second Elul, we read that the 7th, 14th, 19th,
21st, and 28th days of the month were all alike days
of quiet and rest. <q>The 7th day,</q> we are told, <q>is a
day dedicated to Merodach and Zarpanit. It is a lucky
day and a quiet day. The shepherd of mighty nations
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the king) must not eat flesh cooked at the fire or in
the smoke. His clothes he must not change. White
garments he must not put on. He must not offer
sacrifice. The king must not drive a chariot. He must
not issue royal decrees. In a secret place the seer must
not prophesy. Medicine for the sickness of his body he
must not apply. For making a spell it is not fitting.</q><note place='foot'>A translation of the whole text is given in my Hibbert Lectures,
pp. 70-76. With the last prohibition, compare Isa. lviii. 13, <q>not
speaking thine own words</q> on the Sabbath-day.</note>
Here the Sabbath recurs, as among the Hebrews, every
seven days; and Professor Jensen has pointed out that
the 19th of the month, on which there was also a
Sabbath, was forty-nine days or seven weeks from the
beginning of the previous month. There was therefore
not only a week of seven days, but a week of seven-day
weeks as well. In fact, the chief difference between the
Babylonian and the Hebrew institution lay in the subordination
of the Sabbath to the festival of the <q>new
moon</q> among the Babylonians. There was no Sabbath
on the first day of the month; its place was taken by
freewill offerings to the moon.
</p>

<p>
The Sabbath, it will be noticed, was not a fast-day.
Fasts, however, were not infrequent in Babylonia and
Assyria, and in times of danger and distress might be
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
specially ordained. When Esar-haddon was hard pressed
by his northern enemies, he ordered prayers to be made
and ceremonies to be performed to the sun-god, lasting
for one hundred days and nights. It was a long period
of public humiliation, and the god was asked to grant
favourable visions to the <q>seers</q> who implored his help.
In the penitential psalms, fasting is alluded to more than
once. <q>Instead of food,</q> says the penitent, <q>I eat bitter
tears; instead of palm-wine, I drink the waters of misery.</q>
Or, again: <q>Food I have not eaten, weeping is my nourishment;
water I have not drunk, tears are my drink.</q><note place='foot'>Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>, pp. 322, 323.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fast and the feast alternated as they did in Israel.
As we come to know more of the ritual of Babylonia,
the resemblance it bears to that of the Hebrews becomes
at once more striking and extensive. They both start
from the same principles, and agree in many of their
details. Between them, indeed, lies that deep gulf of
difference which separates the religions of Israel and
Babylonia as a whole; the one is monotheistic, the other
polytheistic. But, apart from this profound distinction,
the cult and ritual have more than a family relationship.
Customs and rites which have lost their primitive meaning
in the Levitical Law, find their explanation in Babylonia;
even the ecclesiastical calendar of the Pentateuch
looks back to the Babylonia of the age of Khammurabi.
It cannot be an accident that the Khammurabi or
Ammurapi of the cuneiform inscriptions is the Amraphel
of Genesis, the contemporary of Abram the Hebrew, who
was born in <q>Ur of the Chaldees.</q> The Mosaic Law
must have drawn its first inspiration from the Abrahamic
age, modified and developed though it may have been in
the later centuries of Israelitish history.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lecture X. Astro-Theology And The Moral Element In
Babylonian Religion.</head>

<p>
A hundred years ago, writers on the history or philosophy
of religion had much to say about what they called
Sabaism. The earliest form of idolatry was supposed to
have been a worship of the heavenly bodies. A passage
in the Book of Job was invoked in support of the fact,
and beautifully executed drawings of Babylonian seal-cylinders
were made for the sake of the pictures of the
sun and moon and stars that were upon them. Sir
William Drummond resolved the sons of Jacob into the
signs of the Zodiac;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ædipus Judaicus</hi> (London, 1811).</note> Dupuis derived Christianity itself
from a sort of allegorical astronomy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sabaism</q> has long since fallen into disrepute.
Anthropology has long since taught us that primitive
religion is not confined to a worship of the stars. The
cult of the heavenly bodies was not the source of polytheism;
indeed, there are systems of polytheism in which
it has never existed at all. Of late the tendency has
been to discount it altogether as a factor in the history
of religion.
</p>

<p>
But the tendency has gone too far. There was one
religion, at all events, in which it played an important
part. This was the religion of ancient Babylonia and of
those other countries which were influenced by Babylonian
culture. But even here the decipherment of the
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
inscriptions seemed to show that it belonged to a late
age, and was an artificial product which never affected
the people as a whole. When I delivered my Hibbert
Lectures, I believed that I could dismiss it in a few
words as merely a kind of subsidiary chapter added to
the religion of the State by pedants and scholars.
</p>

<p>
Certain it is that the elaborate system of astro-theology
which characterised Babylonian religion was an
artificial creation. It was the result of a combination
of religion with astronomy which was elaborated in the
schools. Astronomy, like all other sciences, was under
the control of the priests, the observatory rose by the
side of the school within the precincts of the temple, and
the dependence of the calendar on the observations of
the astronomer gave them a religious character. Moreover,
the astro-theology of Babylonia did not go back to
primeval times. The identification of the official gods
with the heavenly bodies belongs to an age when the
official religion had already been crystallised into shape,
and a map of the heavens had been made. We can
almost watch its rise and trace its growth.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the rise and growth are of far earlier
date than was formerly imagined. Astro-theology was
not a mere learned scheme of allegorised science, the
plaything of a school of pedants; it exercised a considerable
influence upon the religion of Babylonia and upon
the history of its development. It had, moreover, a
background in the faith of the people. Like the rivers
and streams, the stars also were really worshipped,<note place='foot'>So in the second book of the <hi rend='italic'>Surpu</hi> series (<hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 59, Col. ii. 106,
Col. iv. 7-9, translated in my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 508, 509); <hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi>
iii. 66. <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> 9, 13.</note> and
the symbols drawn on the seal-cylinders show that this
worship must go back to the oldest period of Babylonia.
Even the ideograph that denotes <q>a god</q> represents an
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
eight-rayed star. The fact is significant. At the time
when the pictorial hieroglyphics were first being formed
out of which the cuneiform characters were to grow, the
star was already the symbol and representative of the
divine. It was not as yet the more general and abstract
<q>sky,</q> it was the particular star that was adored as a
god. Babylonian religion, as far back as its written
history leads us, really begins with Sabaism.
</p>

<p>
How is this fact to be reconciled with the further fact
that the gods of Babylonia were once spirits and ghosts,
the <foreign rend='italic'>zi</foreign>'s of Eridu and the <foreign rend='italic'>lil</foreign>'s of Nippur? To this
question no answer at present is possible; at most we
can only suggest that the <foreign rend='italic'>zi</foreign>, or spirit, was localised in
the star. A spirit of the sun was as conceivable as a
spirit of Ea, and the son of Ea, it must be remembered,
became a sun-god. <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>zi</foreign> of the god</q> meant originally
in the primitive picture-writing <q>the spirit of the star,</q>
and the literal rendering of the invocation in the early
spells would be <q>the spirit of the star who is lord of
Du-azagga,</q> <q>the spirit of the star who is mistress of the
holy hill.</q> In the Book of Isaiah the Babylonian king
is made to say that he would enthrone himself among
the gods on the summit of the Chaldæan Olympos
<q>above the stars of El</q>; and Nin-ip, the interpreter of
En-lil, was at once the sun-god and the moon. Istar, it
must not be forgotten, was primarily the evening star;
and Istar was not only supreme among the goddesses of
Babylonia, she was the type and representative of them
all. The signs of the Zodiac had once been the monster
allies of the dragon of chaos.
</p>

<p>
With all this, it may hereafter prove that the conception
of the divine as a star was introduced by a
different race from that which saw in it a spirit or a
ghost. At all events, it was a conception which the
inscriptions of Southern Arabia have shown to have prevailed
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
among the Western Semites. Professor Hommel
has made it clear<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Aufsätze und Abhandlungen</hi>, ii. pp. 149-165.</note> that the Semitic tribes to which the
Arabs of the south, the Aramæans, and the Hebrews
alike belonged, worshipped four supreme deities&mdash;Athtar,
the evening and morning star; the moon-god and its
messenger or <q>Prophet</q>; and the goddess of the sun.
Athtar is the Babylonian Istar, who has become a male
god in her passage to the Semites; and, while the people
of Hadhramaut borrowed the name of Sin from Babylonia,
those of Qatabân borrowed the name of Nebo
(Anbây). Samas, the sun, has become a goddess; the
moon-god has taken the foremost place in the pantheon,
and the sun has accordingly been transformed into his
colourless reflection. As in the case of Istar, so too in
that of the sun-god, the genderless grammar of Sumerian
facilitated the change. Â, the sun-god of Sippara, had
become his wife under Semitic influence,<note place='foot'>See my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 177, 178.</note> and from
Sippara the conception of a solar goddess passed to the
Semites on the western side of the Euphrates.
</p>

<p>
The supreme Baalim of the South Arabian inscriptions
must thus have been of Babylonian origin. Name and
character alike were derived from Sumerian Babylonia.
And from this the further inference is obvious: Arabian
and West Semitic <q>Sabaism,</q> with its worship of the
heavenly bodies, was not indigenous. It must have been
the result of contact with Babylonian civilisation, a contact
which gave Ur and Harran a mixed population, and
caused them to be the seats and centres of the worship
of the moon-god. The primitive Semitic Baal&mdash;the
<q>lord</q> of a specific plot of earth or tribal territory&mdash;became
a moon-good or an evening star, while his wife
was embodied in the sun.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion is confirmed by a study of the religion
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
of Canaan. Here the place occupied by the moon-god
among Arabians and Hebrews is taken by the sun. The
supreme Baal is the sun-god, and the female Ashtoreth
is identified with the moon. As I endeavoured to show
in an earlier lecture, there was a period in the history
of Babylonian religion when here also the sun-god was
supreme. The gods were resolved into solar deities, or
rather were identified with the sun. The solar element
in Merodach threatened to absorb his human kingship;
it was only his likeness to man that saved him from the
fate of the Egyptian gods.
</p>

<p>
It is just this phase in the history of Babylonian theology
that we find reflected in the theology of Canaan.
Baal has passed into the sun-god, and his characteristics
are those of the sun-gods of Babylonia. The historical
monuments have told us how long and deep was the influence
of Babylonia upon the culture of Canaan, and it
was exercised just at the time when the solar faith had
triumphed in the Babylonian plain. It is not without
significance that Sargon of Akkad, who first brought the
civilisation and arts of Babylonia to the shores of the
Mediterranean, should have had his capital in a city
which adjoined Sippara, the special seat of solar worship.
While Arabia drew its inspiration from Ur, the religion
of Canaan was modified by contact with a culture and
theology that were more purely Babylonian. Phœnician
tradition stoutly maintained that the ancestors of the
Canaanitish people had come from the Persian Gulf.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sabaism,</q> therefore, to use the old term, must really
have been an early form of Babylonian belief. It was
communicated to the Semites west of the Euphrates at
different times and in different ways. To the Western
Semites of Arabia and Mesopotamia it came through Ur,
and consequently set the moon-god at the head of the
divine hierarchy. To the Canaanite it was carried more
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
directly, but at a later period, when the solar worship
had become dominant in Babylonia. The influence of
Nippur had waned before that of Eridu, and out of
Eridu had risen a culture-god whose son and vicegerent
was the sun.
</p>

<p>
The moon-god was addressed in Southern Arabia by
different titles, one of which was that 'Ammi or 'Ammu
which forms part of the name of Khammurabi. Professor
Hommel hints that even the Hebrew Yahveh may
once have been a title of the moon-god among the
Western Semites of Babylonia. As I was the first to
point out, the name of Yahveh actually occurs in a
document of the age of Abraham, where it enters into
the composition of the name Yahum-ilu, the Joel of the
Old Testament. Professor Hommel has since found
other examples of it in tablets of the same period, thus
overthrowing the modern theory which derives it from
the Kenites.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Expository Times</hi>, ix. (1898) p. 522; March 1900, p. 270.</note> It was already known to <q>Abram the
Hebrew</q> in Ur of the Chaldees.
</p>

<p>
The hymn to the moon-god of Ur, to which I have
referred in an earlier lecture,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>.</note> is almost monotheistic in
tone. To the writer he <q>alone is supreme in heaven
and earth.</q> He is the creator of the universe; he is
also the universal <q>Father,</q> <q>long-suffering and full of
forgiveness, whose hand upholds the life of all mankind.</q>
More than that, he is <q>the omnipotent one, whose heart
is immensity, and there is none that may fathom it.</q>
Among the other gods he has no rival; he causes the
herb to grow, and the cattle and flock to bring forth;
and he established law and justice among mankind.
The angels of heaven and the spirits of the earth alike
do homage to him; there is no goddess even who
appears at his side. The hymn formed part of the
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
ritual of the great temple at Ur before the birth of
Abraham, and the Hebrew patriarch may well have
listened to its teaching.
</p>

<p>
From Ur and its mixed population we can trace the
worship of the Babylonian moon-god along the coasts of
Southern Arabia as far as Egypt. In Hadhramaut, as I
have already said, the very name of Sin was retained,
and even in North-western Arabia the name of the
sacred mountain of Sinai bears witness to the cult of the
Babylonian deity. Early seal-cylinders associate with
the moon-god both an ape and a dwarf-like figure, called
Nu-gidda, <q>the dwarf,</q> in Sumerian, who dances in
honour of the god, like the Danga dwarf in Egypt, or
the cynocephalous apes of Thoth. In Egypt, however,
the dwarf assumes the shape of Bes, who is often
represented with an ape on either side; and Bes with his
crown of feathers, along with the apes (or monkeys) that
accompany him, came from the south of Arabia to the
valley of the Nile.
</p>

<p>
The monotheistic tendency of the hymn to the moon-god
stands in marked contrast to the polytheism of the
solar hymns. The solar ritual, in fact, was essentially
polytheistic. But Nannar or Sin, the moon-god, was
<q>the prince of the gods,</q> the ruler of the starry hosts of
heaven. By the side of him the stars were but as the
sheep of a flock in the presence of their shepherd, or as
the people of a State in the presence of their deified
king. Hence he was lord over his brother gods in a
way that the sun-god could never be; they became the
hosts that he marshalled in fight against the enemies of
light and order, the multitude that obeyed his voice as
the sheep follow their shepherd. The moon-god was
emphatically <q>the lord of hosts</q>!
</p>

<p>
The title was applied to other gods in later days.
Nebuchadrezzar calls Nebo <q>the marshaller of the hosts
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>
of heaven and earth,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> i. 51. 1, 13.</note> and Tiglath-pileser <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> makes
Assur <q>the director of the hosts of the gods.</q> The
kings transferred the title to themselves, changing only
<q>gods</q> into <q>men,</q> and so becoming <q>kings of the hosts
of mankind.</q> But the first signification of the term was
<q>the host of heaven,</q> the stars of El above whom the
king of Babylon sought to erect his throne. One of the
primeval divinities of the pantheon&mdash;a divinity, indeed,
who scarcely emerged from his primitive condition of a
primordial spirit&mdash;was En-me-sarra,<note place='foot'>Pronounced Ên-sarra, Ênu-sa-kissati in Semitic.</note> <q>the enchanter of
the (heavenly and earthly) hosts,</q> to whom in some of
the old Babylonian cities a feast of mourning was
celebrated at the time of the winter solstice in the
month Tebet. A hymn entitles him <q>the lord of the
earth, the prince of Arallu, lord of the place and the
land whence none return, even the mountain of the
spirits of earth ... without whom Inguriṡa cannot
produce prosperity in field or canal, cannot create the
crop ... he who gives sceptre and reign to Anu and
El-lil.</q><note place='foot'>See the translation of the hymn in my Hibbert Lectures, p. 301. The
text has been commented on by Fr. Martin, <hi rend='italic'>Textes réligieux assyriens et
babyloniens</hi>, pp. 77-80.</note> He is invoked, like the moon-god, to establish
firmly the foundation-stone that it may last for ever.
But it is not only over the spirits of the underground
world that he holds sway; he reigns also in heaven, in
the close vicinity of the ecliptic, and <q>the seven great
gods</q> who were his sons were stars in the sky. His
attributes, therefore, closely resemble those of the moon-god
of Ur: like the moon-god, he is at once lord of the
sky and of the underworld, a father of the stars of night
who makes the green herb grow in the earth below. In
En-me-sarra, <q>the enchanter of the (spirit)-hosts,</q> the
<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
realm of the moon-god was united with that of En-lil;
as lord of the night he ruled in Hades, and was supreme
even in that <q>mountain</q> of the ghost-world from which
En-lil derived one of his names.<note place='foot'>The god of the <q>great mountain,</q> see above, pp. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
But I must leave to others the task of further pursuing
the path of exploration which I have thus sketched in
outline. That Yahveh was once identified with the
moon-god of Babylonia in those distant days, when as
yet Abraham had not been born in Ur of Chaldees,
explains his title of <q>Lord of hosts</q> better than the
far-fetched theories which have been invented to account
for it. The explanation has at least the merit of being
supported by the ancient texts of Babylonia. Adventurous
spirits may even be inclined to see in Sinai, the
mountain of Sin, a fitting place for the promulgation of
the Law of the Lord of hosts; but such speculations lie
beyond the reach of the present lecturer, and the lectures
he has undertaken to give.
</p>

<p>
The name of En-me-sarra, <q>the enchanter of the
(spirit)-hosts,</q> brings us back to that dark background
of magic and sorcery which distinguished and disfigured
the religion of Babylonia up to the last. The Sumerian
element continued to survive in the Babylonian people,
and the magic which was its primitive religion survived
also. It was never eliminated; behind the priest lurked
the sorcerer; the spell and the incantation were but
partially hidden beneath the prayer and the penitential
psalm. One result of this was the exaggerated importance
attached to rites and ceremonies, and the small
space occupied by the moral element in the official
Babylonian faith. There was doubtless a certain amount
of spirituality, more especially of an individualistic sort;
the sinner bewails his transgressions, and appeals for
help to his deity, but of morality as an integral part of
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>
religion there is little evidence. We look in vain for
anything analogous to the judgment-hall of Osiris and
the negative confession of the Egyptian dead; the
Babylonian gods, it is true, preferred that a man should
walk uprightly, but his future salvation did not depend
on his conduct in this life. He was punished in this
world for his sins and shortcomings, but the sins were
not confined to sins against morality; they equally
included ceremonial transgressions.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, a sort of catechism which forms
part of the ritual of the seers shows that a recognition
of the moral element in religion was not altogether
wanting. The following is Professor Zimmern's translation
of it: <q>Has he estranged the father from his
son? Has he estranged the son from his father? Has
he estranged the mother from her daughter? Has he
estranged the daughter from her mother? Has he
estranged the mother-in-law from her daughter-in-law?
Has he estranged the brother from his brother? Has
he estranged the friend from his friend? Has he
estranged the companion from his companion? Has he
refused to set a captive free, or has he refused to loose
one who was bound? Has he excluded the prisoner
from the light? Has he said of a captive, <q>Hold him
fast,</q> or of one who was bound, <q>Strengthen his bonds</q>?
Has he committed sin against a god, or has he committed
sin against a goddess? Has he offended a god, or has
he held a goddess in light esteem? Is his sin against
his own god, or is his sin against his own goddess?
Has he done violence to one older than himself, or has
he conceived hatred against an elder brother? Has he
held his father and mother in contempt, or has he
insulted his elder sister? Has he been generous in
small things, but avaricious in great matters? Has he
said <q>yea</q> for <q>nay,</q> and <q>nay</q> for <q>yea</q>? Has he
<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>
spoken of unclean things or [counselled] disobedience?
Has he spoken wicked words?... Has he used false
scales?... Has he accepted a wrong account, or has
he refused a rightful sum? Has he disinherited a
legitimate son, or has he recognised an illegitimate son?
Has he set up a false landmark, or has he refused to set
up a true landmark? Has he removed bound, border,
or landmark? Has he broken into his neighbour's
house? Has he drawn near his neighbour's wife?
Has he shed his neighbour's blood? Has he stolen his
neighbour's garment?</q><note place='foot'>Zimmern, <hi rend='italic'>Die Beschwörungstafeln Shurpu</hi>, p. 3 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The list of questions reminds us of the negative confession
of the Osirian creed, but the end and purpose of
it is different. They are the questions put to the penitent
in order that the priest may discover why the wrath of
the gods has fallen upon him. They relate to this life
only, not to the next; conformity to the moral code they
imply brings with it no assurance of eternal happiness,
it is a guarantee only against suffering and misfortune in
the present world. The point of view of the Babylonian
was that of the friends of Job.
</p>

<p>
Morality, in fact, was left in large measure to the
legislator. An old code, which seems to have been
ascribed to the god Ea, asserts explicitly the responsibility
of the ruler, and his amenability to divine punishment
for unrighteous dealing.
</p>

<p>
<q>If the king does not give heed to justice,</q> it begins,
<q rend='pre'>his people will perish and his land be enfeebled.<note place='foot'>We may notice that it is the people, and not the king, who will suffer
for the misdeeds of the latter; cp. 2 Sam. xxiv. 17, and Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
i. 12, 20: <q>quicquid delirant reges, plec tuntur Achivi.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he gives no heed to the law of the land, Ea, the
king of destinies, will change his destiny, and visit him
with misfortune.</q>
</p>

<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he gives no heed to his nobles, his days shall [not]
be long.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he gives no heed to the wise, his land will revolt
against him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he gives heed to the (law-)book, the king will
behold the strengthening of his land.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he gives heed to the writing (<foreign rend='italic'>sipir</foreign>) of Ea, the
great gods will establish him in counsel and knowledge
of justice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If he smites a man of Sippara and gives a wrong
decision, the sun-god, who judges heaven and earth, will
appoint another judge in his land, and a just prince and
a just judge instead of unjust ones.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If the sons of Nippur come to him for judgment, and
he accepts bribes and treats them harshly, Bel, the lord
of the world, will bring a foreign enemy against him and
destroy his army; the prince and his general will be
hunted like outcasts through the streets.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If the sons of Babylon bring silver and offer bribes,
and he favours the Babylonians and turns himself to
their entreaty, Merodach, the lord of heaven and earth,
will set his foes over him, and give his goods and his
treasure to his enemy. The sons of Nippur, or Sippar,
or Babylon who act thus shall be cast into prison.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>WAI.</hi> iv. 55. The inscription was first translated by George Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Discoveries</hi> (1875), pp. 409-411, and by myself in the <hi rend='italic'>Records of
the Past</hi>, first ser., vii. (1876), pp. 119-122. Mr. King has recently given
the first part of the text in his <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion</hi>, pp. 217, 218.</note>
</p>

<p>
The dissociation of ethics and religion in Babylonia
was due to a considerable extent to the practical character
of Babylonian theology and the limitation of the
doctrine of rewards and punishments to this life. In
contrast to the Egyptian, who may be said to have lived
for the next world, the Babylonian lived for this. It
was here that he was rewarded for his piety or punished
<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
for his sins. The world beyond the grave was a place of
unspeakable dreariness. I have already described it in
a previous lecture. It was a prison-house of darkness
and unsubstantiality; a land where all things were forgotten,
and those who inhabited it were themselves
forgotten of men. It resembled the Hebrew Sheol;
indeed, it is probable that the name of Sheol is borrowed
from Babylonia,<note place='foot'>Hommel suggests that <foreign rend='italic'>silân</foreign>, <q>the hollow place underneath the
earth,</q> is derived from <foreign rend='italic'>sa'ûlânu</foreign>, <q>sheol</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Aufsätze</hi> und <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen</hi>,
iii. p. 347).</note> and borrowed names are apt to indicate
that the ideas connected with them were borrowed too.
In the gloom of that underworld, where the ghosts of the
dead fed on dust and refuse, the hideous monsters of
chaos still moved and dimly showed themselves, while
<q>the kings of the nations</q> sat on their shadowy thrones,
welcoming the slaughtered king of Babylon with the
words: <q>Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou
become like unto us?</q> The dead man never again saw
the light of the sun. There was no Osirian paradise to
receive him, with its sunshine and happy meadows; even
the brief period of light which the solar creed of Egypt
allowed the bark of the sun-god to bring to the denizens
of the other world, was denied to the dead Babylonian.
Over the gates of the world beyond the grave the words
were written: <q>Abandon hope, all ye that enter here.</q>
There was no return; none, even with the help of Merodach,
could come back to the home he had left on earth;
the sevenfold gates of Hades opened only to admit those
that entered it. Death meant the extinction of light
and hope, even of the capacity for feeling either pleasure
or pain.
</p>

<p>
It was on this life, therefore, that the religious thoughts
of the Babylonian were centred. And his view of his
relation to the gods was a curious mixture of spirituality
<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>
and the commercial instinct. On the one hand, it was a
question of barter; if the man was generous in his gifts
to the gods, if he did what they approved and abstained
from what they condemned, above all, if the rites and
ceremonies of religion were correctly fulfilled, the gods
were bound to grant him all that his heart desired. On
the other hand, if misfortune fell upon him, it was a proof
that he had sinned against them. And as the centuries
passed the consciousness of sin sank more and more
deeply into the heart of the Babylonian. At first, indeed,
the sins were offences against the ritual rather than
against the moral and spiritual code. The ghosts and
spirits of the old Sumerian faith were non-moral; if
some of them inflicted pain and disease upon man, it was
because it was their nature to do so, and the only defence
against them was in the charms of the sorcerer. But
with the arrival of the Semite, and the consequent transformation
of the goblin into a god and of the sorcerer
into a priest, a new conception was introduced of the
divine nature. The gods became human, and the humanity
they put on was that of civilised man. They became
moral agents, hating iniquity and loving righteousness,
ready to help the creatures they had made, but chastising
them for their offences as the father would his son.
<q>Father,</q> in fact, is one of the commonest titles given to
the god in the new age of Babylonian religion. It was
only in the conception of Hades that the old ideas still
maintained their influence, that the powers who ruled
there still continued to be the malignant or non-moral
monsters of an earlier belief, and that a common lot was
believed to await in it all mankind, whatever might have
been their conduct on this side of the grave.
</p>

<p>
In this world, on the contrary, the conviction that sin
brought punishment with it became more and more pronounced.
And with the conviction came an increasing
<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>
belief in the efficacy of prayer and repentance, and the
necessity for purity of heart. The words supposed to
have been put into the mouth of Merodach after his
creation of man, late in date though they may be,
testify clearly to the fact. I give them in Mr. King's
translation<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion and Mythology</hi>, p. 83. See George Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>Chaldæan Account of Genesis</hi>, pp. 78-80 (II. 10-13, 16-23).</note>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Towards thy god shalt thou be pure of heart, for that is the glory of the godhead;</q></l>
<l>Prayer and supplication and bowing low to the earth, early in the morning shalt thou offer unto him....</l>
<l>The fear of god begets mercy, offerings increase life, and prayer absolves from sin.</l>
<l>He that fears the gods shall not cry aloud [in grief],</l>
<l>he that fears the spirits of earth shall have a long [life].</l>
<l>Against friend and neighbour thou shalt not speak [evil].</l>
<l>Speak not of things that are hidden, [practise] mercy,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>When thou makest a promise (to give), give and [hold] not [back].</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Already, in the age of Khammurabi, the author of the
story of the Deluge makes it the punishment inflicted on
mankind for their misdeeds, and the Chaldæan Noah is
rescued from it by Ea on account of his piety. The
penitential psalms and ritual texts are full of illustrations
of the same fact. It is true that the misdeeds are often
merely involuntary violations of the ceremonial law or
offences against the ritual, but the sense of guilt attaching
to them is already profound. It required centuries
before the Babylonian was able to distinguish between
moral and ceremonial sin,&mdash;if, indeed, he ever succeeded
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>
in doing so,&mdash;but at an early period a consciousness of
the heinousness of sin already lay heavily upon him, as
well as of the need of repentance. A profound sense of
his transgressions, and of the punishment they deserved,
had grown up within him long before he had learnt to
confine it to moral guilt. In this respect, again, he
differed from the Egyptian: penitence and the consciousness
of sin belonged to Babylonia; we look in vain for
them in the valley of the Nile. The light-hearted
Egyptian was too contented to feel them; the gods he
worshipped were, like himself, kindly and easy-going, and
the pantheism of the upper classes offered no place to a
reproachful conscience.
</p>

<p>
But the gods of Babylonia, in the days when the
Sumerian and the Semite had become one people, were
stern judges. The theology of Eridu was coloured and
darkened by that of Nippur; Ea might save Xisuthros
from the waters of the Flood, but En-lil had doomed all
men to destruction. And whether it was the sun-god
who was worshipped, or the moon-god of Ur, it was still
a judge who beheld and visited all the deeds of living
men. In the sun-god the judge predominated, in the
moon-god the father, but that was all. The father was
also a judge, the judge was also a father, and the same
word might be used to denote both.
</p>

<p>
But it must be remembered that the judgeship of the
son-god and the fatherhood of the moon-god were confined
to the present world. They were not dead gods
like Osiris, whose tribunal was in another world. There
was no postponing the evil day, therefore; a man's sins
were visited upon him in this life, just as it was also in
this life that his righteousness was rewarded. A death-bed
repentance was useless; penitence, to be effective,
must be manifested on this side of the grave.
</p>

<p>
Hence came the penitential ritual which forms so
<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
striking a feature in the service-books of Babylonia. It
was reduced to a system, like the confessional in later
days. The penitent was instructed by the priest what
to say, and the priest pronounced his absolution. For
the exercise of priestly absolution was another essential
feature of Babylonian religion.
</p>

<p>
Besides the consciousness of sin and the conception of
repentance, the idea of mediation must also be traced to
Babylonia. On the earliest seals the priest is represented
as acting as a mediator between the worshipper and his
god. It is only through the priest that the layman can
approach the deity and be led into the presence of the
god. This idea of mediation has a twofold origin. On
the one side, it goes back to the beliefs which saw in the
magician&mdash;the predecessor of the priest&mdash;the possessor
of knowledge and powers that were hidden from the rest
of mankind; on the other side, it has grown out of the
doctrine that the priest was the vicegerent of the god.
It was thus the result of the union of two conceptions
which I believe to have been respectively Sumerian and
Semitic. The deified king or pontiff necessarily took
the place of the god on earth; Gudea, for instance, at
Lagas was the representative of the god Inguriṡa, and
therefore himself divine. The fact that the gods were
represented in human forms facilitated this conversion of
the minister of the deity into his adopted son and representative;
the powers and functions of the god were
transferred to him, and, like the vassal-prince in the
absence of the supreme king, he acted in the god's place.
</p>

<p>
The Semitic Baal was a lord or king of human shape
and passions. He thus stood in marked contrast to the
Sumerian ghost or spirit; and, as we have seen, the gulf
between them is too deep and broad to be spanned by
the doctrine of evolution. For the Sumerian the world
outside man was peopled with spirits and demons; for the
<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>
Semite it was a human world, since man was made in the
image of the gods. The triumph of the gods of light
and order over the monsters of chaos symbolised not
only the birth of the present creation, but also the
theological victory of the Semite over the Sumerian.
And with the victory came a conception of the divine
which was modelled on that of the organised State.
As the human head of the State was himself a god,
delegating his authority from time to time to his human
ministers, so too in the world of gods there was a
supreme Baal or lord who was surrounded by his court
and ministers. Foremost among these were the <foreign rend='italic'>sukkalli</foreign>
or <q>angels,</q> the messengers who conveyed the will of
their lord to the dwellers upon earth. Some of them
were more than messengers; they were the interpreters
and vicegerents of the supreme deity, like Nebo <q>the
prophet</q> of Borsippa. And as vicegerents they naturally
became the sons by adoption of Bel; Asari of Eridu first
takes the place of Ea, whose double he originally was,
and then in the person of Merodach becomes his son;
Nin-ip of Nippur, the messenger of En-lil, is finally
transformed into his son, and addressed, like Horus in
Egypt, as <q>the avenger of his father.</q><note place='foot'>K 255, <hi rend='italic'>Obv.</hi> i. 19, <hi rend='italic'>Ablu dannu mutir gimilli Bili abi-su</hi>, <q>the mighty
son, the avenger of Bel his father.</q></note> The hierarchy
of the gods is modelled upon that of Babylonia, and the
ideas of mediation and vicegerency are transferred to
heaven.
</p>

<p>
Repentance, the consciousness of sin, and mediation
are thus conceptions all of which may be traced back to
Babylonia. And each of them leads naturally, if not
inevitably, to other and cognate conceptions. Mediation,
as I have pointed out, is partly dependent on a belief in
a doctrine of vicegerency, which, in combination with a
profound sense of sin, leads in turn to the doctrine of
<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>
absolution. And mediation itself is given a wide meaning.
The priest mediates between the layman and his
deity; the lesser gods between mankind and the supreme
Baalim. M. Martin aptly compares the intercession of
Abraham for the doomed cities of the plain, and the
doctrine of the intercession of the Saints in the Christian
Church.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Textes religieux assyriens et babyloniens</hi>, p. xvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
The consciousness of sin, again, is similarly far-reaching.
It extends to sins of ignorance and omission as
well as to sins of commission. Time after time the
penitential psalms ask forgiveness for sins the very
nature of which was unknown to the penitent. <q>The
sin that I have done I know not,</q> he is made to say,
<q>The transgression that I have committed I know not.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>An offence I have committed unwillingly against my god.</q></l>
<l>A sin against my goddess unwillingly have I wrought:</l>
<l><q rend='post'>O lord, my transgressions are many, manifold are my sins!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The disease or misfortune that had overtaken him was
a proof of the sin, even though it had been committed
involuntarily or in ignorance that it was wrong. <q>When
I was little I sinned,</q> says another psalm, <q>yea, I
transgressed the commandments of my god.</q><note place='foot'>Martin, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, p. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
Repentance has its corollary confession, whether
public or private. And the ritual texts show that both
public and private confession was practised in Babylonia.
Indeed, private confession seems to have been the older
and more usual method. The penitential psalms are in
the first person singular, like the Hebrew psalms; in
public confession the Babylonian probably believed that a
man was more likely to think about the sins of others
than about his own.
</p>

<p>
Penitence implies a need of absolution. It also implies
<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>
a belief in the sinfulness of human nature and the
purity of the divine. The purity, it is true, may be
ceremonial rather than moral, and in the early days
of Babylonian religion the ceremonial element almost
obscured the moral. But as time went on the moral
element grew ever stronger, and the ritual texts began to
be superseded by prayers of a more spiritual character.
The prayers addressed by Nebuchadrezzar to Merodach
rise almost to the height of a passionate faith in the
absolute goodness and mercy of the god.
</p>

<p>
Speaking generally, then, we may say that the religion
of Babylonia was essentially anthropomorphic, with all
the faults and virtues of an anthropomorphic conception
of the divine. But it was grafted on a primeval stock of
Sumerian shamanism from the influences of which it
never wholly shook itself free. It thus differed from
Hebrew anthropomorphism, with which in other respects
it had so much in common. Behind the lineaments of
Hebrew anthropomorphism ghost or goblin are not to be
found.
</p>

<p>
And yet between the religion of Babylonia and that of
Israel there was much that was alike. It was natural,
indeed, that it should be so. The Babylonians of history
were Semitic, and Abraham the Hebrew had sprung from
a Babylonian city. In the last lecture I drew attention
to the similarity that existed between the temples of
Babylonia and that of Jerusalem, a similarity that extended
even to details. There was the same similarity
between the Babylonian rituals and the Mosaic Law; the
priesthood, moreover, was established on the same lines,
and the prophets and seers of Israel have their analogues
in those of Chaldæa. The religious law and ritual of the
Hebrews looks back like their calendar to the banks of
the Euphrates.
</p>

<p>
The same lesson is taught by the literary traditions
<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>
of the Hebrew people. The cosmology of Genesis has
its roots in the cosmology of Eridu, and the first home
of mankind is placed by the Old Testament in Eden,
<q>the plain</q> of Babylonia, which was watered by the
Tigris and Euphrates. The Babylonian story of the
Deluge is the parent of that which is recounted in the
Hebrew Scriptures, while it was at Babylon that the
dispersal of mankind took place. The background of
Hebrew history is as purely Babylonian as the background
of Hebrew ritual.
</p>

<p>
And, as Gunkel has shown,<note place='foot'>H. Gunkel, <hi rend='italic'>Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit</hi> (1895).</note> the old Babylonian traditions
embodied in the Book of Genesis must have made
their way to the West at the very beginning of Hebrew
history. They enter into the web of the earliest Hebrew
thought, and are presupposed by Hebrew literature.
The cosmology which saw the primordial element in the
watery deep, and told of the victory that had been won
over Tiamât, the dragon of chaos, must have been already
known in Canaan when the language and script of Babylonia
were taught in its schools, and Babylonian literature
studied in its libraries. Long before the Mosaic age,
the literary culture of Babylonia had profoundly affected
the peoples of Syria, and had penetrated even to the
banks of the Nile. Need we be surprised, then, if we
find a <q>sea</q> in the temple of Solomon, the symbol of
beliefs which had their origin on the shores of the
Persian Gulf, or priestly ordinances which recall those
of ancient Chaldæa?
</p>

<p>
The ordinances and temples were but the outward
symbols of the ideas that had created them. The
anthropomorphism of Semitic Babylonia is reflected in
the anthropomorphism of the Israelites. The sense of
sin and of the overwhelming power of the deity, the
efficacy of penitence and the necessity of a mediator,
<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>
are common to both Babylonia and Israel. Hence it is
that the penitential psalms of the Babylonian ritual bear
so striking a resemblance to the psalms of the Old Testament;
hence, too, the individual element and deep
spirituality that characterise them. Israel was indebted
to Babylonia for something more than the seeds of a
merely material civilisation.
</p>

<p>
It is true that there is a gulf, wide and impassable,
between the Babylonian religion as we decipher it in the
cuneiform tablets, and the religion of Israel as it is presented
to us in the Old Testament. On the one side, we
have a gross and grotesque polytheism; on the other, an
uncompromising monotheism. Babylonian religion made
terms with magic and sorcery, and admitted them in a
certain degree to its privileges; they were not incompatible
with polytheism; but between them and the
worship of the one God there could be no reconciliation.
It was the same with the sensualities that masqueraded
at Erech in the garb of a religious cult; they belonged
to a system in which the sun-god was Baal, and a goddess
claimed the divided adoration of man. To Israel they
were forbidden, like the necromancy and witchcraft with
which they were allied.
</p>

<p>
But deep and impassable as may be the gulf which
separated the Mosaic Law from the official religion of
Babylonia, different as may have been the development
of prophecy in Babylonia and Israel, the primordial
ideas from which they started were strangely alike. The
same relation that is borne by the religion of ancient
Egypt to Christianity is borne by the religion of Babylonia
to Judaism. The Babylonian conception of the
divine, imperfect though it was, underlay the faith of
the Hebrew, and tinctured it up to the end. The Jew
never wholly freed himself from the dominion of beliefs
which had their first starting-point in the <q>plain</q> of
<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
Babylonia; his religious horizon remained bounded by
death, and the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob continued
to be the God of the living and not of the dead.
It was in this world that the righteous were rewarded
and the wicked punished; the world to come was the
dreary shadow-land of Babylonian teaching, a land of
darkness where all things are forgotten, but also a land
where <q>the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary
are at rest.</q>
</p>


</div>

</div>

<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Â, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham, <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref>, <ref target='Pg498'>498</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>absolution, Babylonian doctrine of, <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abusir. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Busiris'>Busiris</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abydos, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adapa the first man, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Æons, Gnostic, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Akhem'/>
<l>Akhem, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Horus'>Horus of Nekhen</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akkad, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allat, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alu, fields of, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Am Duat. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Book-Am-Duat'>Book of</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amherst, Lord, of Hackney, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Ammi, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amon, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, born of a virgin, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Amon-Hotep-IV'/>
<l>Amon-hotep <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> (Khu-n-Aten), <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amon-t, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amorites, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amraphel. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Khammurabi'>Khammurabi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>amulets, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anak, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anat, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ancestor-worship, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>angel, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>, <ref target='Pg496'>496</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anhur, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>animal gods of Babylonia, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>animal worship, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ansar, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>anthropomorphism, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg498'>498</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anu, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" identified with other gods, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anubis, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anunit, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anunna, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anunna-ki, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anuqet, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>ânz</foreign>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>apes of Thoth, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apophis, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabia, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arad-Ea, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arallu, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>, <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ararat, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ark, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg460'>460</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arum, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aṡari, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg496'>496</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashel, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asherah, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashtoreth, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assur, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assur-bani-pal, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assurit, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>astronomy, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>astro-theology, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atarpi, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aten-Ra, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" hymn to, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" universal father, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athtar (Istar), <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atmu. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Tum'>Tum</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>At-Nebes, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>axe, double-headed, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azaga-suga, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>ba.</foreign> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Soul'>Soul</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baal, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>

<lg>
<l>Babylon, colony of Eridu, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonia and Egypt, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" divided into States, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian theology artificial, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonians, mixed race, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bâkhu, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bakis, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balawât, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ball, Mr., <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>banner-name,</q> <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bast, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bau, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg460'>460</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>beast-worship, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bel'/>
<l>Bel, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel-Merodach, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Merodach'>Merodach</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belshazzar, <ref target='Pg469'>469</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beltis (Bilat), <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>bennu.</foreign> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Phoenix'>phœnix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berenikê, city of, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berossos, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bes, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilu. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Bel'>Bel</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Book-Am-Duat'/>
<l>Book Am Duat, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Respirations, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of the Dead, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borsippa, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmanism, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breasted, Professor, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bubastis, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>bulls, winged, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Busiris'/>
<l>Busiris, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Buto'/>
<l>Buto, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cain, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>calendar, Babylonian and Hebrew, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canaan, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cannibalism, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cats, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chabas, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Champollion, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>chaos, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chemosh, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cherubim, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian theology, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity and Osirian creed, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement, St., <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>confession in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg488'>488</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>confession, the negative, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>cow of Istar, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>creation, epic of, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> sq.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" of heavenly bodies, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" of man, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Sumerian story of, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>creator-potter, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>dad</foreign>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daddu, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascius, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dam-kina, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>dances, sacred, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danga dwarf, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>death, origin of, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>decans, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>deep, the, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>deification of Babylonian kings, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>deluge, Babylonian story of, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg493'>493</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>deluge in Genesis, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>de Morgan, M., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dendera, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dep. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Buto'>Buto</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>de Sarzec, M., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deukalion, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>development, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>dimmer</foreign>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>disc, solar, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" legend of, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>dismemberment of corpse, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>double. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ka'>Ka</ref> and <ref target='Index-Zi'>Zi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Du-azagga, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dungi, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ea, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ea, code of, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ea-bani, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eden or Edin, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edfu, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, earliest races of, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" early kingdoms of, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" origin of name, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Pharaonic conquest of, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian conception of God, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, conservative, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" disinclined for the abstract, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, origin of, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>ekimmu</foreign>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E-kur(a), <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>

<lg>
<l>Elamites, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-El-Kab'/>
<l>El-Kab (Nekheb), <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El-lil. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-En-lil'>En-lil</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elohim, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>emanation, doctrine of, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>embalming, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>ên</foreign>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endor, witch of, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-En-lil'/>
<l>En-lil, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>En-me-sarra, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref>, <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ennead, the, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enos, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>ênu</foreign>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erech, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ereskigal, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eridu, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erman, Professor, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erment, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ê-Saggil, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ê-Sarra, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esau, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etana, story of, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>euhemerism, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evans, Dr. A. J., <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>fasting, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast of Weeks, <ref target='Pg474'>474</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>feather cap, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>festivals, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>fetishism in primitive Egypt, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>folk-lore, limitations of, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>frog, the, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, Book of, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" cosmology of, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" deluge in, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>genii of the dead, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ghost of unburied dead, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilgames, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref>, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnostics, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, Egyptian conception of, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, Sumerian conception of, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>goddess, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>gods, Babylonian, identified with each other, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>gods, Babylonian, human, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goshen, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Bear, the, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grébaut, M., <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>green paint, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gudea, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunkel, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadad, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hades, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hâpi. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Nile'>Nile</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harmakhis, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harper, song of the, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harran, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hathor, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hathor-headed column, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haupt, Prof., <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hawk of Horus, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>heart, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliopolis. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-On'>On</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" school of, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hell, Egyptian, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hêraklês, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herkhuf, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermetic books, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermopolis, school of, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotos, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesperides, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heuzey, M., <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hezekiah, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierakonpolis. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Nekhen'>Nekhen</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hieroglyphics, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-High-Priest'/>
<l>high priest, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg462'>462</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Patesi'>patesi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy of Holies, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hommel, Professor, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hor-Behudet, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hor-pes, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, the elder, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, the younger, son of Isis, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg496'>496</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" followers of, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Horus'/>
<l>Horus, the golden, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" the mummified, of Nekhen (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Akhem'>Akhem</ref>), <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, two eyes of, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/>

<lg>
<l>hosts, divine, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" lord of, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>hymns, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igigi (angels), <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imhotep, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incantations, book of, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>incarnation, doctrine of, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>inspiration, verbal, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" as witch, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iskhara, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israelitish religion, <ref target='Pg498'>498</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istar, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istar, descent of, to Hades, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isum, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jachin (Yakin), <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob's ladder, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, Professor, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>, <ref target='Pg469'>469</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jensen, Professor, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jokha, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jubilee, year of, <ref target='Pg476'>476</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>judgment, future, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvenal, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ka'/>
<l>Ka, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ka-name. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> banner-name.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Khammurabi'/>
<l>Khammurabi (Amraphel), <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khar, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khent-Amentit, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khepera, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>kher-heb, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khonsu, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>khu</foreign>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khumbaba, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khu-n-Aten. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Amon-Hotep-IV'>Amon-hotep IV</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>kigal</foreign>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingu, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kisar, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kutha (Cuthah), <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagas. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Tello'>Tello</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larsa, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>law, Egyptian conception of, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, Mosaic, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>, <ref target='Pg474'>474</ref>, <ref target='Pg498'>498</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lehmann, Dr., <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenormant, Fr., <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>lil, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lilith, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindl, Dr., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Logos, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucas, Paul, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugal-zaggisi, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magan (Sinaitic Peninsula), <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>magic in Israel, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref>, <ref target='Pg500'>500</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>magical texts, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" " Babylonian, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malik, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mami, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>man, deification of, in Egypt, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>man, deification of, in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manes, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manetho, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>maqlû, collection, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mas, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maspero, Professor, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mât, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>materialism, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>mediation, Babylonian idea of, <ref target='Pg495'>495</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memphis, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" origin of name of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ménant, M., <ref target='Pg468'>468</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendes, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meneptah, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menes, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mentiu, the, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mentu, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>mercy-seat, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mermer, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Merodach'/>
<l>Merodach (Asari), <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merodach identified with other gods, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merodach, etymology of name of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mert-seger, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>mesen</foreign>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messiah, the Egyptian, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>metaphors, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>metempsychosis, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Min, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>mitra</foreign>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>monotheism in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>moon, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" eclipse of, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Moon-God'/>
<l>Moon-god, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Babylonian, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>moral test of righteousness, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>morality not religion, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>mountain of the world, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mummu (chaos), <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mummy'/>
<l>mummy, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mut, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabonidos, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg448'>448</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>name, identical with thing, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" virtue of, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namtar, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nannar. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Moon-God'>Moon-god</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naram-Sin, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naville, Dr., <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebhât, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebo, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>, <ref target='Pg496'>496</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadrezzar, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>, <ref target='Pg498'>498</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" palace of, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nefer-Tum, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nekheb. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-El-Kab'>El-Kab</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" goddess, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Nekhen'/>
<l>Nekhen (Hierakonpolis), <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nergal, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>neter</foreign>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New year, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Nile'/>
<l>Nile, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> sq.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" sources of, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nimrod, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninâ, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nin-gis-zida, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg460'>460</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nin-ip, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg474'>474</ref>, <ref target='Pg496'>496</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nin-lil, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nippur, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nit, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nizir, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>nomes, origin of, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" standards of, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norden, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nu, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nu-gidda, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nusku, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nut, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nu-Urru, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oannes, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>offerings, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-On'/>
<l>On (Heliopolis), <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opis, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oppert, Professor, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Orion'/>
<l>Orion, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg494'>494</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, judgment-hall of, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" the, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>paradise</hi>, etymology of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patæki, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Patesi'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>patesi</foreign>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-High-Priest'>high priest</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pe, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>penitence, Babylonian idea of, <ref target='Pg493'>493</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepi, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pestilence-god, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peters, Dr., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrie, Professor, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh as god, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" son of the Sun, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaonic Egyptians, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philæ, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Phoenix'/>
<l>phœnix, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piehl, Professor, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pierret, M., <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinches, Dr., <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>planets, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platonic ideas, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>polytheism, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>postal service in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>priestly colleges, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>priests, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>prophetess, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref>, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>prophets, Babylonian college of, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>, <ref target='Pg463'>463</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>psalms, penitential, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg500'>500</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Assyrian, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptah, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/>

<lg>
<l>Ptiris, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punt, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purim, feast of, <ref target='Pg476'>476</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyramid texts, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quibell, Mr., <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" followers of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" legend of, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rahab, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ram, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rassam, Hormuzd, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rawlinson, Sir H. C., <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rawnsley, Canon, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reisner, Dr., <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>relics, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>religion, ancient, difficult to realise, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>religion, earliest forms of, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" individual in origin, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renouf, Sir P. L., <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>resurrection, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ritual, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>rpâ</foreign>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saba, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabaism, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg476'>476</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" etymology of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>sacrifice, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" daily, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" of firstborn, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" of lamb, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahu. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Orion'>Orion</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>sahu.</foreign> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Mummy'>mummy</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahu-Ra, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakæa, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samas. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sun-God'>Sun-god</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samuel, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sargon of Akkad, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sati, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sati or Sutu, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>savage man, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>scape-goat, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>scarabs, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>scepticism, Egyptian, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scheil, Dr., <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweinfurth, Dr., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>scorpion-man, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>sea,</q> artificial, <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seb, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" legend of, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sebek, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sebennytos, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>seer, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sehêl, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sekhet, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selk, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semitic supremacy, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapis, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>serpent, bronze, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" guardian, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" with seven heads, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" worship, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seth, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamanism, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sharu, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shêkh Herîdî, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shem, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheol, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>shewbread, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ships of the gods, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shu, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Moon-God'>Moon-god</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>sin, Babylonian conception of, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>, <ref target='Pg492'>492</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinai, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinaitic Peninsula, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-liqi-unnini, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sippara, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sirius'/>
<l>Sirius (Sopd), <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, George, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref>, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>smiths, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sokaris, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>solar cult, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sopd. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sirius'>Sirius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>sorcerer, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Soul'/>
<l>soul, Egyptian doctrine of, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>sphinx, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>spirits, seven evil, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref>, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>stars, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>statues, wonder-working, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Memphite, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" why made, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumer, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumerian, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumerians, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sun-God'/>
<l>Sun-god, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Babylonian, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>

<lg>
<l>Surippak, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>surpu</foreign>, the collection, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Susa, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutu, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutu-sar, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>swine, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>sycamore worshipped, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" of Matarîya, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>symbolism in Egypt, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabernacle of Congregation, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tables of the Law, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>tablets of destiny, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tammuz, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>, <ref target='Pg460'>460</ref>, <ref target='Pg474'>474</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanen, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tasmit, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tefnut, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tel el-Amarna, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tello'/>
<l>Tello (Lagas), <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>temple of Solomon, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>temples, open in Egypt, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Babylonian, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref>, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thoth, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiamât, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>tithes, <ref target='Pg469'>469</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>totemism, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>transformation, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>tree of life, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" knowledge, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>trees, sacred, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>triad, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Babylonian, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>trinity, Egyptian, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> sq.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Theban, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tum'/>
<l>Tum (Atmu), <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Typhon, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uazit, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Un-nefer, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ur, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urim and Thummim, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ur-nes, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ushebti, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>utukku, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>vampire, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venus, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>virgin-birth, the, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiedemann, Professor, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, Sir G., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>witchcraft, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>word, the creative, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xisuthros, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yahum-ilu, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yahveh, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref>, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>zaqiqu</foreign>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zenjirli, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Zi'/>
<l>Zi, the, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ziggurat, <ref target='Pg450'>450</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref>, <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zi-kum, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimbabwe, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmern, Professor, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref>, <ref target='Pg488'>488</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zodiac, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zu, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
